THE FAIRY GODMOTHERS.

In one of the beautiful bays on the coast of Fairy Land, a party of
Fairies was assembled on a lovely evening in July. There are many
beautiful bays on the coast of England, and there is one especially,
my dear little readers, which you and I know of, where a long line of
grand old rocks stretches far into the sea on the left-hand extremity,
while in the distance to the right a warning lighthouse with its
changing lights gives an almost solemn beauty to the scene; for one
cannot help thinking, at the sight of it, of the poor storm-driven
mariner, whom even that friendly light may fail to save from a sad and
sudden death. But beautiful as this little bay is, of which I speak,
and fond as we are of it, it is nothing, I do assure you, compared to
the bays in Fairy Land! There, there are no light-houses reminding one
painfully of danger and destruction near, but all is loveliness and
peace; and even the rocks would be turned into soft pillows by the
good-natured Fairies who inhabit the country, should any strange
accident drive a mortal ship on that shore.
Also the bays in Fairy Land face to the west, which is a great
advantage, for in an evening there you may sit and watch the golden
sun dipping behind the waves; and the rich red tints he sends out upon
the rocks before he sets, are beyond measure beautiful and attractive.
Especially, I believe, the Fairies enjoy this time of day, for they
are odd little creatures, rather conceited, and fond of everything
pretty; consequently they like to be floating about the rocks in their
white dresses when the crimson and golden hues of sunset shine on
them, knowing very well they look like so many bright flowers on the
occasion.
The day I speak of however had been very hot, and at the time I speak
of, the Fairies felt a little lazy and were reclining on some rocks
covered with sea-weed and amusing themselves by talking. In general
the conversation of these little creatures is rather light and
frivolous and gay; but it is really a fact that they were just then
all serious together and all were engaged in a very profound
conversation on human happiness.
I am sorry to have so many explanations to give, but I think it quite
necessary to tell you the reason of so uncommon an event as a party
of Fairies being serious. Well then, there were going to be, very
shortly, several extremely gay christenings in the world, and some of
the Fairies had been invited to attend at them as Godmothers, in order
that they might bestow Fairy gifts on the different infants.
Four or five of the christenings were to take place the next day, and
the Fairies who were going were discussing with each other what gifts
they should bestow, and as their only object was to ensure the
happiness of the children for whom they were interested, they
naturally fell into a discourse as to what gifts were most likely to
have so charming an effect. "Your Godchild is a girl too, I believe,"
said Euphrosyne to Ianthe [Fairies are privileged, you know, to have
romantic names] "what do you think of bestowing upon her?" "Why,"
answered Ianthe, "the old story, I suppose--BEAUTY: at least such
was my intention, but if you can any of you show me I am wrong in
supposing it a cause of happiness to the mortal race, why, I suppose
I must give her ugliness instead."
"Sister, I hope you will do no such thing," murmured a young Fairy who
lay near twining seaweeds into a wreath. "I never until this evening
heard a doubt upon the subject, and to tell you the truth the only
time I ever envy a mortal is when I see a regular beauty enter a large
assembly. Oh, the triumph of that moment! Every eye turned upon her;
murmurs of admiration, not unmixed with envy, greeting her as she
sweeps along; everyone courting her acquaintance; a word, a smile of
hers more valued than a pearl or a ruby. A sort of queen of Nature's
own making, reigning royally in undisputed sway, let her circumstances
of life be what they may! Look how mean the richest woman who is ugly
looks by the side of her! No no, dear Ianthe, make your little lady
handsome, and you have done the best that Fairy can do for her. I
declare I envy her beforehand! Here where we are all so beautiful
together there is no interest or excitement about it--it is quite
flat." And so saying the young fairy Leila laid herself down to her
wreath again. "Why, Leila, you are absolutely eloquent!" observed
Ianthe, "Beauty it certainly must be."
"Oh, I declare," pursued Ianthe, rousing up again, "I have sometimes
really wished myself ugly, that I might some day have the pleasure of
suddenly finding myself beautiful!"
"Oh, but then," said a Fairy from behind, "is there no danger of your
regular beauty, as you call her, getting as tired of being beautiful
as you are, and wishing herself ugly too?"
"Certainly, not," answered Ianthe, "for, for an earthly beauty there
would always be the excitement of being envied."
"Come, come," persisted the former speaker, "then the gift of being
envied would be the best thing to bestow, at all events a necessary
addition."
"Oh," cried Leila, stopping her ears, "I can't argue, I never could--I
can't hear any more, I am quite satisfied that I am right; you can't
argue away the pleasure of being a beauty in a ball-room. Ask any of
them themselves."
"Well," said Ianthe, "we need pursue the subject no further. I am
resolved. My baby is to be beautiful, beautiful as the dawn of the
morning; they shall call her Aurora!"
"I shall not follow your example," observed Euphrosyne, "I don't at
all like that notion of the necessity of envy to make the beauty's
joy complete. Besides, I'm not at all sure beauty is not much more
charming in idea than in possession. Nobody spend their lives in
entering a ball-room, and one gets sadly tired of one's own face. I'm
sure I do, beautiful as it is;" and as she spoke the Fairy stooped
over a clear tide pool which mirrored her lovely countenance; "and yet
look what a nose I have! It is absolutely exquisite! And this hair!"
and she held up her long silken curling tresses and looked at them
reflected in the water as she spoke. A musical laugh rang through the
fairy group. Euphrosyne resumed her seat. "There isn't a mortal damsel
in the world who would not go into raptures to resemble me," pursued
she, "and yet--but, oh dear, I am getting quite prosy, and it is quite
useless, for Ianthe has decided. I, on the contrary, am thinking of
something far less romantic and interesting, but I suspect far more
necessary to the happiness of mortals than beauty--I mean RICHES."
"Men are horribly fond of them, certainly," observed the Fairy from
behind, whose name was Ambrosia. "I can't endure men on that very
account. Look at the grubby wretched lives they lead in
counting-houses and banks, and dreadful dingy holes and corners of
great towns, where we wouldn't set the soles of our feet, and this for
forty or fifty years, perhaps, in order that in the fifty-first, or
perhaps later still, they may turn into butterflies for the little bit
of life that is left to them. And such butterflies, too! not knowing
what to do with their gay coats and fine wings when they get them at
last."
"I think you are putting an extreme case," observed Euphrosyne.
"Though the grubs themselves may not thoroughly enjoy the riches they
have so laboriously acquired, their children or grandchildren may, and
live at ease and enjoy them. I should not think of bestowing great
riches on uneducated paupers. But it is another matter to give them to
people whom education has refined, and who would know how to enjoy and
employ them."
"I wonder," suggested a very little Fairy, scarcely grown to her full
size, "why you don't just give your Godchildren moderate good health,
and enough money to make them quite comfortable without puzzling
them?"
"You are a complete Solomon," observed Euphrosyne, "but you must know,
my dear, that moderate good health and a mere comfortable competency
would hardly be considered Fairy gifts by our friends in the lower
world. These things are, as it were, the absolute necessities of a
happy life; they are the beef and mutton (to borrow an earthly simile)
of the entertainment. Fairy gifts form the somewhat unnecessary (and
questionably wholesome) second course, the sweets, the bonbons, the
luscious luxuries of the repast.
"Very few, by comparison, get them. Very few infants you know have
Fairy Godmothers, but we make it a rule that those who have, shall
always be distinguished from the crowd. Other-wise our power would not
be believed in. No, my little Aglaia, all our Godchildren start from
the point you spoke of--'caeteris paribus,' as those dingy black
lawyers say--all other things being equal--it is a question now of
bestowing extra superfine Fairy gifts."
Aglaia tittered--"I know Sister Euphrosyne is thinking of the
christening suppers, and the whipped creams, and the syllabubs!" and
away she tripped to the other end of the bay, lest the older Fairies
should scold her for impertinence.
"Certainly," pursued Euphrosyne, "I have a great contempt for riches
myself. Bah! the idea of all the troublesome as well as wicked things
men do in order that they may be able to keep a lumbering thing they
call a carriage, to drive them round a dirty town. Just think of that
one thing alone! It is hardly credible." And Euphrosyne laid her head
by the side of Leila's, and looked up into the deep blue sky.
"Remember," said Ambrosia, from behind, "it is a choice with poor
mortals between heavy foot-walking, and the lumbering vehicles you
talk of. Perhaps when their legs ache terribly, the carriages are not
such bad things. We can hardly judge dispassionately in such a matter,
we who can float and fly!" and the delicate Ambrosia, springing up,
floated softly round the bay, and then returned smiling to her
companions. "It made me almost ill to think of aching legs," observed
she, "how I do pity the mortal race!"
"How pretty you looked as the sun shone golden upon your white robe,"
exclaimed Leila, "It was a sight for a mortal painter to die of!"
"A genius for painting would be a grand Fairy gift," observed Ianthe.
"Too doubtful of success," answered Euphrosyne, "and the Musician's
power the same; besides musicians always die young and with exhausted
minds. The art is too much for mortal nerves."
"Their atmosphere is too thick," said Leila. "How tired I am of your
discussions! Let us sing! Whatever music may be to them, it is food to
us."
Then all those beautiful Fairies arose and joining hands on the rocks
they sang to the now dying Sun a chorus of Fairy Land! Now and then
these ravishing melodies are permitted to reach to mortal ears:
chiefly in dreams to the sick and sorrowful, for Fairies have great
compassion on such, and allow them a distant taste of this, the most
exquisite of their enjoyments.
There was no more discussion that night, nor did they argue much the
next morning. There was the rising sun to welcome from the sleeping
caves on the eastern side of their country, and the bath to be
enjoyed, and their wings to plume, and sweet odours to gather from the
early flowers; and the time passed so quickly, they only met to take a
hurried leave. "We must understand each other however, before we
separate," said Euphrosyne.
"Dear Ianthe, your Gift is Beauty?" "It is." "And mine is Riches,"
said Euphrosyne. "All the pleasures of life shall be at my Godchild's
feet," said another Fairy, laughing. "If that will not ensure
happiness, I know not what will." Ambrosia held back--"Your choice,
dear Sister?" asked Euphrosyne.
"Come! we have no time to lose."
"It must remain a secret," was the reply. "Our discourse yesterday
evening was so thoughtful, so sad, I could not sleep. I arose hours
before you this morning, ere daylight streaked the sky. Dear Sisters,
how shocked you will be to hear I wept; but now I have determined. If
my gift succeed I will tell you all about it, or you shall guess it
yourselves; for I now propose that our Fairy Gifts this year shall be
a sort of experiment on human happiness. Let us from time to time
visit in company our young charges, and let the result--that is, which
of our Gifts is proved to confer the greatest amount of happiness, be
written in the archives of our kingdom for the future benefit of the
mortal race."
A murmur of approbation rose, sweet as the vibration of a harp-chord
through the assembly.
There was no time for enquiry about the other gifts: the travelling
Fairies arose and beat their gauzy wings upon the western breeze. A
melodious rushing was just audible; the distant murmurs of the earthly
sea the most resemble that sweet dream of sound. In a few moments the
departing sisters became invisible, and those who remained returned to
float by the sea shore, or make sweet music in the bowers of their
enchanted land.
       *       *       *       *       *
Time is a very odd sort of thing, dear readers. We neither know whence
it comes nor whither it goes;--nay we know nothing about it in fact
except that there is one little moment of it called the present, which
we have as it were in our hands to make use of--but beyond this we can
give no account of, even that little moment. It is ours to use, but
not to understand. There is one thing in the world, however, quite as
wonderful, and quite as common, and that is, the Wind. Did it never
strike you how strange it was that the strongest thing in the world
should be invisible? The nice breezes we feel in summer and the
roughest blasts we feel in winter in England are not so extremely
strong you will say: but I am speaking, besides these, of the winds
called hurricanes that arise in the West Indian Islands, and in other
places in the world. These dreadful hurricanes have at times done as
much mischief as earthquakes and lightning. They tear down the
strongest trees, overthrow the firmest houses and spread ruin and
desolation around, and yet this terrible power, so tremendous, and
against which the cleverest contrivances can provide no defence, is as
invisible as the great Maker of Heaven and Earth. How unbelieving many
people would look if you told them of a dreadful creature that was
coming to the world, which could be heard to roar, be felt to knock
down every thing in its path--men, women and children, houses,
churches, towers, castles, cities, and trees the most firmly
rooted--and yet which you could never catch the faintest glimpse of,
for it was always invisible, even when it roared the loudest! As
invisible then, as when in its mildest moods, it, as it were, purred
softly over the country like a cat. How the good people would laugh,
and tell you you were very silly to believe in such a thing. Yet I
think this is not at all an incorrect description of the great
invisible Power WIND. Now the lesson we may learn from this is to be
humble-minded; for since we live in the constant presence of a Power
we cannot see, we ought to feel it is equally possible other Powers
may exist of which our other senses cannot take cognizance. There is
an old proverb--"Seeing is believing"--but you perceive, dear readers,
we are forced to believe in the wind though we never see him at all.
To return to Time who is travelling fast on while I am rambling after
the wind, he has puzzled the artists a good deal I should say, for
with all their skill at representation they have never hit upon any
better idea of him than an old Man with wings. An old man with wings!
Can you fancy anything so unnatural! One can quite understand
beautiful young Angels with wings. Youth and power and swiftness
belong to them. Also Fairies with wings are quite comprehensible
creatures; for one fancies them so light and airy and transparent,
living upon honey dew and ambrosia, that wings wherewith to fly seem
their natural appendages. But the decrepitude of old age and the wings
of youth and power are a strange mixture:--a bald head, and a Fairy's
swiftness!--how ridiculous it seems, and so I think I may well say
Time is a very odd sort of thing.
Among those who have to deal with Time, few are more puzzled how to
manage him than we story-tellers. In my first chapter, for instance, I
gave you a half-hour's conversation among some Fairies, but I think
you would be very angry with me were I to give you as exactly every
half-hour that passed over the heads of the little girls with Fairy
Godmothers, till they grew up. How you would scold, dear little
readers, if I were to enter into a particular description of each
child's Nurse, and tell whether Miss Aurora, Miss Julia, Miss
Hermione, &c. &c. &c. were brought up on baked flour, groat-gruel,
rusks, tops and bottoms, or revalenta food! Whether they took more
castor-oil, or rhubarb and magnesia; whether they squalled on those
occasions or were very good. When they cut their teeth and how,
together with all the &c. and ups and downs of Nursery life which
large families, such as you and I belong to, go through daily.
Well then, suppose I altogether pass over a period of ten years, and
enter into no minute particulars respecting that portion of Time. You
must know that the Fairies had agreed that all the children should
have the same (and rather a large) amount of intellect, or what you
would call cleverness: that is to say, they were all equally capable
of learning anything they chose to learn: also they had all fair
health, plenty to eat and drink, and all the so called "necessary"
comforts of life.
Now then to our story.
At the end of ten years the Fairies agreed to go and have a peep how
their charges were going on. They quite knew that nothing decisive
could be found out, till the children had come to years of discretion
and were their own mistresses. Still they thought it would amuse them
just to go and see how the charms were working, as it were; so, away
they went.
Now picture to yourselves a nice large nursery, much such a one as
your own, in which several children are playing. The eldest, a girl of
ten, you may see yonder lounging--gracefully perhaps--but still
lounging in a rocking chair which she is swinging backwards and
forwards, having set it in motion by the action of her foot on the
floor. What a lovely face! I do not think you ever saw one so handsome
except in a print in one of Mamma's best picture books. All the
features are perfectly good and in proportion, and the dark blue eyes
are fringed by the longest eyelashes ever seen. The hair of this
little girl too--look at it, as the soft chestnut ringlets wave about
on her shoulders as she swings, and show the round richness of the
curls.
Now if you ask about the expression on her face, I must tell you it
was rather languid and "pensieroso." Pensieroso is an Italian word
really meaning thoughtful--but this little girl was not thinking,
for then the expression of her face would have been much stronger and
firmer and less languid; but the word has got to be used for a sort of
awake-dreamy state when one lets thoughts float lazily along without
having any energy to dwell upon them, and see whether they are good or
bad.
The thought that was passing through this little girl's head at the
time I mention and which made her look so languid and pensieroso, was
  "I wish it was 6 o'clock."
Now here you are ready to laugh, I know, for there was nothing to look
so languid about, in "I wish it was six o'clock!" but the fact was
this: at half-past six the little girl's Mamma was expecting a large
party to dinner and the little girl was to dress at six and be ready
to go down and see the company:--I might add and to be seen by them;
for the little girl was, as you will have guessed, the beautiful
Aurora herself, and there had been plenty of foolish people, though
her good Mamma was not one of them, to tell her how pretty she was and
how much people admired her.
It is a very pleasant thing to be admired, both for children and grown
up people. "The love of approbation," as it is called, i.e. the wish
to be approved of and admired is a feeling which is very strong in
most people; not in quite all, perhaps, but in most people
certainly. But like all other powers of the mind considered apart from
the influence of the heart and conscience, it is capable of being used
to a very bad or a very good purpose. Thus you may remember what our
Saviour says of the Pharisees who stood praying at the corners of the
streets that they might be seen of men: Verily, they had their
reward--viz: that men admired them: whereas those who do good deeds
and pray privately, i.e. unseen and unadmired by men, should verily
have their reward in that day when God who seeth in secret himself
shall reward them openly.
Here you see is the same strong feeling,--love of approbation,
exercised in a wrong and a right direction. The Pharisees wish for the
approbation of men, good people wish for the approbation of God.
Now, love of approbation exists about much smaller matters than I have
just been mentioning. But I would warn my young readers, that, to be
always thinking, and bothering yourselves as to what other people are
thinking about you, is one of the most uncomfortable and injurious
habits a person can get into. It makes them so selfish and
egotistical. And here was one of Aurora's dangers. Because she knew
she was pretty, she was always wondering what other people were
thinking about her, a habit which so far from contributing to what the
good Fairy had wished, viz. her happiness, was constantly spoiling her
comfort from hour to hour. And here, at ten years old, was this little
lady swinging languidly and idly on the rocking chair, wishing it was
six o'clock, instead of enjoying, as she might so well have done, that
small portion of time, time present, which is, as I told you before,
the only bit of him we can ever lay hold of, as it were. Of time
present, just then, she thought nothing. She would have said, (had she
been asked), that the old gentleman moved very slowly in spite of his
wings, for her eye was fixed on that delightful time future, six
o'clock. Well! at last the clock struck, and Aurora sprang from her
chair,--her whole face altered in a moment. "Now, Nurse, I may dress,
may I not?" she exclaimed, radiant with animation, and all the languor
and dreaminess gone over like a cloud from before the sun. And it is
true that just then Aurora was happy. It was a pleasant task to her to
arrange and smooth that curling hair, and to put on the simple white
dress she knew set off her beauty so well. But alas! for the happiness
caused by thoughts of one's self! The toilet over, she ran down to
her Mamma, and was welcomed with a smile of fondness and approbation.
Indeed, when she was happy, a sweeter face could not be seen, for she
was not a naughty child, and if it had not been for the Fairy gift, I
do think she would have been a very nice one.
The Fairies who invisibly had witnessed all I have described to you,
were not so loud in their admiration of Aurora as you or I might have
been. They are so handsome themselves, they think but little of
earthly beauty, and even Ianthe could not conscientiously say, "What a
happy looking little girl she is." That was just the one thing that
was wanting: ay, and it continued wanting even after the room was
filled with company, and she was petted, and caressed, and praised on
every side. Her spirits became very high, however, and she enjoyed
herself much; and it is perhaps only very very critical folk, bent on
spying out a fault, that could have detected the little clouds of
anxiety that now and then shot across her face. A thought of whether
her curls were all right, or her dress untumbled, &c. just now and
then disturbed the charm, and prevented her forgetting herself
sufficiently to allow her to be quite at ease and happy, and she would
glance at herself in the mirror, and put back the hair from her brow,
lest Mrs. I-know-not-who, who was just then entering the room, should
not think her quite as lovely as Mrs. Somebody-else did, who had very
foolishly been saying so rather in a loud tone to her Mamma.
At last the fatal time arrived to go to bed. Aurora was much too
sensible to cry, or be cross, you must know, but as she closed the
door of the drawing-room and left the gay company, a sigh very heavy
for so young a heart to have breathed, escaped her, and it was slowly
she retraced her steps up stairs. She was in reality tired, for it was
later than her usual bed-time, and when she went into her room she
threw herself on the chair and yawned. The young Nurse who attended to
undress her, asked her if she had enjoyed herself. "Oh yes!" was her
ready answer. "All is so bright, and gay, and entertaining among those
ladies, and they are so good-natured to me,"--(another sigh coupled
with the recollection of, and how much they admire me!)--"But I do
so hate being a little girl, and having to go to bed. I wish the time
would come quicker for me to be grown up, and be down stairs
altogether, and talk, and enjoy myself all the evening!" Oh, Aurora,
Aurora, with that dissatisfied face where is your beauty? with that
discontented mind where is your happiness?
"Your charm is not working perfectly, Sister," observed Euphrosyne to
Ianthe.
"Her's is not the age for perfect happiness and enjoyment as a beauty,
remember," replied Ianthe, "and she feels this herself."
"Man never is but always to be blest," cried Ambrosia laughing. "You
see I can quote their own poets against them."
"You are prejudging now, Ambrosia, wait till another ten years is
over; but we must see our little beauty through the twenty-four
hours." Ianthe now waved a tiny wand in a circle around Aurora's
head,--the long eyelashes sank over her eyes, and the beautiful child
fell into a sweet and placid sleep.
Morning, which awakens all young creatures to life, enjoyment, and
action, awoke Aurora among the rest, and she arose in health and
strength, and the full glow of animal spirits. "This is happiness,
however," exclaimed Ianthe to her companions, as the young girl sprang
about, carolling to herself the while. And so it was, for at that
moment no forecastings into futurity disturbed the comfort of present
pleasure: but an accidental glimpse of her face caught in a
looking-glass as she passed, recalled Aurora to the recollection of
HERSELF! and the admiration she had obtained the evening before. At
first some pleasure attended the remembrance, and she gazed with a
childish triumph at her pretty face in the glass. In a few minutes,
however, the voice of her Governess calling her to lessons disturbed
the egotistical amusement, and the charming Aurora frowned--yes,
frowned! and looked cross at the looking-glass before she quitted
the apartment.
And now, dear little readers, let me remind you that Aurora was a
clever little girl, for the Fairy had taken care of that. She had
every faculty for learning, and no real dislike to it; but this
unlucky Fairy gift was in the way of every thing she did, for it took
away her interest in every thing but herself; and so, though she got
through her lessons respectably, it was with many yawns, and not a few
sighs, and wonderings what Mamma was doing; and did the Governess
think there would soon be another dinner party? and didn't the
Governess, when she was a little girl, wish very much she was a
grown up woman? and, finally, she wished she had been able to talk
when she was a baby at her christening, because then me would have
begged the Fairy Godmother to give her the gift of growing up to be a
young lady very quick indeed, and of learning every thing without any
trouble at all! And so saying, Aurora yawned and laid down her book,
and the poor Governess could hardly keep her temper at such repeated
interruptions to the subject in hand.
"My dear," she exclaimed, "Fairies have no power to counteract what
God, has ordained, and he has ordained that we enjoy but little what
we get at without labour and trouble."
"Ah taisez-vous donc ma chère!" cried Aurora, flopping her ears with
her hands, and running round the room shaking her long curls
furiously. "Vous me faites absolument frémir! Excuse my French, but I
am certain you are the eldest daughter of the old woman in the wood,
and you are just now dropping vipers, toads, newts, and efts from your
mouth at every word you utter!"
The good-natured Governess laughed heartily at the joke, for they had
just been reading the old French fairy tale of "Les deux Fées," and
the application amused her; but she shook her head gravely at Aurora
afterwards, and reminded her that no serious truth was well answered
by a joke, however droll.
A bell rings, a carriage is at the door. Miss Aurora is wanted.
Visiters! Ah! here is happiness again! But it lasts but a short time,
and the reaction is the same as before--drooping eyes, languid
eyelids, and a sigh.
Books, drawing, music, work, even domestic recreations, all deprived
of their charm through this idolatry of self!
The curtain closed over this scene.
"A charming child, Ianthe, but for your Fairy Gift, which is spoiling
her."
"I repeat to you we are no judges yet. Now for riches, Euphrosyne!"
At the same hour of evening, and under the same circumstances, of a
party about to assemble, let me introduce you to a beautiful little
boudoir or up-stairs sitting-room adjoining an equally pretty sleeping
apartment in a magnificent house in a town. The passages are carpeted
all over, and so are the boudoir and the sleeping-room, and they are
furnished with sofas, easy chairs, and every description of luxurious
comfort; and all this for the accommodation of a little girl of ten
years old, who in one of the easy chairs is lying back in front of the
fire, with her tiny feet on a bright brass fender. She has a gold
watch in her hand, which is suspended round her neck by a chain of the
same material, and she is playing with it, and with the seals, and
pretty ornaments hung to it, that jingle as she moves her hand. Ever
and anon she glances at the face of the watch.
But life is very easy to her, and the chair is very soft, and her feet
are very warm. At last, however, she gets up and rings a silver bell
that is on the mantel-piece. A servant answers the summons. "It is
time for me to dress, I believe, Annette; the company are expected
to-day at half past six. Has my new frock come home?"
"Yes, Miss."
"Let me look at it."
A delicate blue satin, trimmed with the finest lace, is produced from
a band-box.
"It is very pretty, I think, Annette."
"It is downright beautiful, Miss."
"And so expensive," pursued the little girl whose name was Julia,
"that I don't think any one else I know is likely to imitate it, which
is my greatest comfort!"
And so saying, the rich Miss Julia ---- (an only daughter), whose
comfort seemed to depend on no one else being as comfortable as
herself, commenced her toilet, i.e. her maid both commenced and
finished it for her, for those who can command the unlimited
assistance of servants are apt to be very idle in helping themselves.
"Your Julia looks self-satisfied enough," observed Ianthe, "but I do
not see that this is more like real happiness than my Aurora's face
before the party."
"Perhaps," returned Euphrosyne, "the same remark applies to her as to
Aurora--the age for thoroughly enjoying riches is hardly arrived. You
smile, Ambrosia! Well, we do not yet know your experiment, and you
yourself do not know how it has answered. Take care that our turn for
laughing at you does not soon come!"
Julia was dressed at the end of the half-hour, but not sooner. Her
toilet occupied more time than Aurora's. She could not decide what
ornaments she would wear, and at last getting out of humour with the
"embarras des richesses" she fixed on a necklace which, though
extremely handsome, was scarcely fit for a child. She was neither
pretty nor otherwise, but when good humoured and happy her face, like
that of all other creatures of her innocent time of life, was
attractive and pleasant to behold. Oh, that children did but know
wherein the secret of being loveable and beloved lies! In holding fast
the innocence and simplicity of their infant years; in the cheerful
spirit, the universal kindheartedness, the open honesty, the sweet
teachableness and readiness of belief, which are the real
characteristics of childhood and which we so love to trace in their
faces. It was these things our Saviour called upon grown-up people to
imitate, and so to receive the kingdom of Heaven as little children.
And oh, that grown-up people would imitate these things; for if they
would become in these respects as little children, the sweet cast of
mind would be reflected in their faces too, and the ugly looks given
by envious discontent, deceitful thoughts, unkind intention and
restless want of faith and hope would all be washed out of the world.
But now, my dear readers, can you call that the best of Fairy gifts,
which had so great a tendency to bring the naughty passions of
grown-up life into the heart, and therefore on to the face, of a
little girl? Well, but riches have a tendency that way; and though
Julia was not a very naughty girl she was being led into very sad
feelings by the Fairy gift. When she went down to the company, her
secret anxiety was to examine all the dresses of her Mamma's friends
and resolve some day to surpass them all. Even as it was she received
much pleasure from knowing that her own dress was far beyond the reach
of ordinary folk. She thought too of her necklace with secret
satisfaction, when the ladies were talking to her, for she perceived
their eyes frequently attracted by its brilliancy and beauty. Then her
mind rambled into futurity, to the day when she would astonish these
very ladies far more than now by the richness of her costume. Ah, dear
readers, would our Saviour if present have called this little child
to him, and said, "Of such is the kingdom of Heaven?" But all these
selfish thoughts made her conversation less pleasant and cheerful than
it would otherwise have been; for you may be sure she was not
listening with any interest to what was said to her, while she was
thus planning silly schemes about herself.
And not having listened with any interest to what was said to her, you
may guess that her answers were dull and stupid; for when people are
talking of one thing and thinking of another they become very flat
companions. At times when she could forget herself she became natural
and then was both pleasant and pleased, and asked some ladies to let
their children come and see her next day, to which they consented. But
now came a sad drawback. One of the ladies told her that her little
girl should bring to shew her a most beautiful gold fillagree work-box
set with precious stones, which one of the maids of honour about
court, who was her godmother, had given her a few days before. This
lady had saved a few of the queen's hairs very carefully, and had had
them placed in a little circle of crystal in the middle of the box,
and they were set round with the most beautiful rubies. It was a
present worthy of a Fairy Godmother, and certainly the donor was the
daughter of a duchess, which perhaps is the nearest thing to being a
fairy.
You will be shocked, my dear readers, to hear that the account of this
box was as disagreeable as a dose of physic to poor Julia. Nay it was
worse than physic, for a peppermint-drop can take the taste of that
away in a minute. But not all the peppermint-drops in a chymist's shop
could take away the taste of the fillagree-box from Julia. She had
been thinking before of showing all the treasures of her boudoir to
her little friends next day; but this horrid box was like a great
cloud closing over her sunshine. She knew she was naughty, but she was
so in the habit of being selfish she could not conquer her peevish
vexation. Annette wondered what could be the matter, and her Governess
sighed as she perceived her face clouded, even when she was repeating
her evening prayer; but no questioning could extract from her what was
amiss.
Oh, what a condition for a child to go to sleep in! Euphrosyne was
greatly annoyed. "They are not correcting her evil dispositions,"
cried she. "I do not allow that this has anything to do necessarily
with being very rich."
Ah, good Fairies, you do not know "How hardly shall they that have
riches enter into the kingdom of Heaven."
Look now at that young face, asleep on a downy pillow, in a bed richly
hung with crimson drapery, in a room filled with luxuries, glowing
with warmth and comfort. You are shocked that the heart within should
be disturbed by nasty little envyings, that made the good things she
possessed of no value to her. 'Tis well; but remember we are all rich
by comparison. Go to the poor frost-bitten wayside beggar-child, my
little readers; bring him into your comfortable drawing-room, which
you sit in every day and think nothing about, and he will fancy he has
got into Paradise. It is a luxurious palace to him. Take him to your
snug bed and let him sleep there, and it will be to him what a state
apartment in Windsor Castle would be to you. Do not then let you and
me scold too much at Julia, but let us keep on the watch to drive away
from ourselves the discontented grumbling thoughts that are apt to
make us all ungrateful to God. Julia did not sleep well. The fillagree
box was a fort of night-mare to her. She dreamt of its growing up into
a great giant, and thumping her on the head, and calling out that she
ought to be ashamed of herself. Do you know, I think this dream was
owing to her Godmother, Euphrosyne, for she lingered behind the other
Fairies as they vanished, and shook, not waved, her wand over the
sleeping child, with a very angry face.
In the morning Julia, like Aurora, awoke in a temporary forgetfulness
of her troubles. The morning air is so refreshing and sleep does one
so much good, and the sun shining through the windows looks so gay,
and all things speak of hope so loudly in a morning, who can be
sullen? Certainly not little girls full of life and expectation. But
the thought of the fillagree box by degrees took possession of her
mind and rankled there as before. She too had a Governess, and many
lessons to learn and much to do, and she did them; but neither English
history nor French fairy tales could quite drive away the fillagree
box. Indeed it introduced its horrid face before her into the midst of
a multiplication sum, and Mademoiselle thought she was bewitched to
have grown so stupid over her arithmetic all at once. She spent a half
hour over that one sum, and when it was done she was so much tired she
gave up lessons for the day. Besides, she had to prepare for her
friends. She went into her boudoir, opened her cabinets and unfolded
her treasures of various sorts--oh I can't tell you what beautiful
things! besides interesting collections of foreign and English shells,
and stuffed humming birds, which you and I should be charmed to
possess. And Julia was in general most happy when she was looking
over her property, but rather more because she possessed valuable
curiosities than because she cared about them, I fear. For my part,
I wonder very much that the humming birds and shells did not teach
her to be more humble-minded; for no art or jewellery can imitate or
come up to their glorious beauty. Well, she amused herself tolerably
in spite of the visions of the fillagree box and the queen's hair,
which now and then came between her and her usual feeling of
self-satisfaction.
Presently her young friends came--several little girls of various
ages, and now nature once more revived in poor Julia. The children
felt and expressed such hearty pleasure at the sight of her treasures.
There were such joyous exclamations; such bursts of delight; such
springing and jumping about, that Julia became infected with the
general pleasure, and was a happy child herself. Yes! even though the
fillagree box had been shown off and admired. But what do children in
general know about the value of things and how much they cost? Ah,
much more just in their judgments than we elders are apt to be, a bird
of Paradise such as adorned the top of Julia's cabinet, or a peacock's
tail, such as she had in a drawer, is to their unprejudiced eyes more
desirable than the gold of Ophir itself!
So now you see this triumph of simplicity over art, despoiled the
fillagree box of all its horrors, for the innocent children admired
her shells yet more--unsophisticated, and insensible to the long story
about the value of the rubies, the maid of honour, and even the
queen's hairs.
Still the Fairies felt and saw that it was not Euphrosyne's gift, but
rather the forgetfulness of it which caused these hours of happiness
to Julia, and somewhat puzzled as to the result they left the votary
of riches, not quite without a sensation that little Aglaia's proposal
of moderate health and enough riches to be "comfortable without being
puzzled," was about the best thing after all, though not much of a
Fairy gift. And now, my little readers, I am beginning to get rather
tired of my story, and to feel that you may do so too. I think I am
getting rather prosy, so I must try and cut the matter short. Four out
of the five Fairy gifts were like beauty and riches, worldly
advantages. For instance, there was the little girl who was to have
every earthly pleasure at her feet--i.e. she was to have every thing
she wished for--why she was fifty times worse off than either Aurora
or Julia, for I will tell you whom she was like. She was like the
fisherman's wife in Grimm's German popular fairy tales, who had every
thing she wished, and so at last wished to be king of the sun and
moon. I doubt not you remember her well, and how she was in
consequence sent back to her mud cottage. I think, therefore, I need
not describe the young lady who had that Fairy gift.
There was another who was to be loved wherever she went; but nothing
is worth having that is had so easily, and this child got so sick of
being kissed and fondled and loved, that it was the greatest nuisance
to her possible, for disagreeable people loved her just as much as
nice ones, and for her part she hated them all alike. It was a very
silly Fairy gift.
Come with me then to Ambrosia's God-daughter, whom they visited last,
and whose Fairy gift the other Fairies were to guess at!
Neither you nor I, my dears, ever heard a fairy-laugh. Doubtless it is
a sweet and musical sound. You can perhaps fancy it? Well then, do
fancy it, and how it rang in silver peals when our fairy friends, on
entering the last nursery they had to visit, found Ambrosia's protégée
in a flood of angry tears, stamping her foot on the ground in a
passion! "You naughty naughty girl!" exclaimed the old Nurse, "you'll
wake the baby and make your own eyes so red you won't be fit to be
seen to night by the company!"
"I don't care about my eyes being red, tho' I don't want to wake the
poor baby," sobbed the little girl, slightly softening her wrath: "but
the cat has unravelled all the stocking I have been knitting at for so
many days, and I had nearly just finished it, and now it's all
spoilt;" and she roared with vexation. "Miss Hermione, if you go on so
I shall certainly send for your Mamma, and the baby will be quite
poorly, he will! and we shall know who made him so," added Nurse
triumphantly. "I can't make the baby poorly with crying, Nurse, so
that's nonsense you know," observed Hermione; "but I didn't mean to
disturb him; only my stocking is gone, and I don't know what to do."
And here she sobbed afresh.
"Do! why ain't you going down to the ladies, and can't you be brushing
your hair and washing your face and getting ready?" "But it isn't
time." "Well, but can't you get ready before the time a little? and
then, when you're dressed and look so clean and nice and pretty, you
can sit in the chair and we can look at you!" and here the good old
Nurse gave a knowing smile and nodded her head.
Hermione caught sight of the comical coaxing glance, and, in spite of
her misfortune, burst into a fit of laughter. "Hum, hum, hum! now
you'll wake the poor thing by laughing, Miss Hermione. I do wish you'd
be quiet:" and here the Nurse rocked the child on her knee more
vigorously than ever.
"Then why don't you tell me what I am to do with my stocking," cried
Hermione. "Oh well, I know what I will do--something quite as quiet as
a mouse. I will wind up my poor worsted." Hereupon the little girl
picked up the puckered remains of her luckless grey stocking which a
facetious young cat had spent at least a quarter of an hour in
ingeniously unravelling with his claws. It was a tiresome tedious job
we must admit, and required a strong effort of patient perseverance,
but Hermione soon became engrossed in its difficulties and a dead
silence ensued. At last Nurse who had while rocking the sleeping baby
on her knee, been watching the child's proceedings, suddenly
exclaimed, "Well to be sure, Miss Hermione, you have such patience as
I never before did see."
[The Fairies exchanged glances.
"It is Patience, Ambrosia."
"What a hurry you are in!" was the reply.]
"No I haven't, Nurse, indeed," answered Hermione. "I had no patience
at all when I was in a passion with the cat just now."
"Well, I suppose there are two or three sorts of Patiences, Miss,
then," persisted Nurse, "for I'm certain you have some sorts. But,
dear me, its ever so much past six o'clock, and you have to be dressed
by half-past. Do put away the worsted and get yourself ready, Miss,
and call Jane to help you."
Here the Nurse and Hermione nearly had a scuffle over the worsted.
Hermione declared the cat had spoilt her stocking; and the only
comfort left to her now was to roll it comfortably up into a ball.
Nurse on the contrary insisted that it didn't signify a bit what
became of the worsted; she must dress and go down. The dispute ended
by Hermione running off with the half finished ball and its untidy
remains, and cramming the whole concern into the pocket of her best
frock. "The people will soon be tired of talking to me," muttered she
to herself, "and then I can finish my ball quietly in the corner
behind Mamma's chair."
The thought of this ingenious plan for her private amusement down
stairs so tickled Hermione's fancy that she was on the giggle the
whole time she was being dressed. "If Nurse did but know what was in
the pocket of my best frock and how fat it is! how she would scold,
and what a fight we should have." And she could hardly refrain from
loud laughter at the thought. When she had got her frock on she sat
down, and laying her arm over the fat pocket asked Jane to touch up
her curls: and while this operation was going on she began to talk to
the nurse.
"Nurse, should you think it a very nice thing to go to a dinner party
and sit in chairs all round a large room, where the coloured covers
are taken away and everything looks very gay, and so tidy, nobody is
allowed to do anything but smile, and talk, and wear white kid
gloves?"
"Very nice, Miss, it's so like a lady," was the Nurse's ready reply.
"Well then, I don't think it's nice at all, Nurse--I think it's very
nasty and stupid."
"Dear, Miss Hermione, how you do talk; I hope you won't tell the
ladies so when you get down stairs."
"Oh dear no, that would be rude, and it's wrong to be rude, but to
tell you the truth I don't know what I shall do when I grow up if I am
obliged to be so dull as that is, very often."
"Goodness, Miss Hermione, to hear you talk one would think you'd
better be a housemaid at once, instead of a lady with nothing to do."
"Nurse, I should see no objection to be a housemaid at all, only that
I am learning so many things that wouldn't suit a housemaid; but
without being a housemaid there are many pleasanter things to do than
to sit in that stupid sort of way. I like the room when all Papa's
books and papers are about, and when he is scribbling away so busy,
and when Mamma has got her microscope out looking at seaweeds or
curiosities. I have a chance then myself. I don't like ladies who say
nothing but 'Pretty little dear, what a nice colour she has,' just to
please Mamma."
What Nurse in England could be expected to enter into so philosophical
an investigation of the habits of society?
Hermione's did nothing but assure her it was time to be off, and she
only hoped she would sit still and talk prettily, and never trouble
her head whether it was stupid or not.
When Hermione got into the drawing room and saw the company seated as
she had described to her Nurse, she felt very much disposed to laugh
again, but made an effort and composed herself. Still her face was
beaming with mirth and fun, and when some ladies said "What a happy
looking little girl," they were quite sincere. That sort of face too
worked wonders, and her Mamma's friends liked her much and talked
pleasantly to her, and she was pleased and happy and quite forgot the
ball of worsted, as well as the ladies' white kid gloves. A young lady
however who had her arm round Hermione's waist and was playing with
her, suddenly felt the round protuberance in her pocket. "Ah you
little rogue, what have you here?" "Its a secret," cried Hermione. "I
think I can unravel your mysterious secret, little girl, you are a
favourite with the housekeeper," added she, whispering in Hermione's
ear, "and she has just given you an orange."
"You are a very bad guesser of secrets," whispered Hermione in
return. "It's no such thing!"--"Then it's an apple." "No, nor an
apple."--"Then it's a peach, and your new frock will be spoilt." "No
it isn't a peach either, and it's a secret." The young lady loved fun,
and a playful struggle ensued between her and Hermione; in the course
of which the large grey worsted ball and its long ravelled tail were
drawn from the little pocket.
Hermione had now to tell the history of the ball, which she did
naturally and honestly, but when she added, quite seriously, that she
intended, when they had done talking to her, to go behind her Mamma's
chair and finish winding it up, you may guess how they laughed.
"Come here, my little dear, and let me look at you," cried an elderly
lady in spectacles, putting out her hand and laying hold of
Hermione's. "Why what an industrious little soul you must be! a
perfect pattern! There now! you may go behind my chair and finish your
ball of worsted; nobody wants to talk to you any longer."
This old lady was rather crabbed, and had not quite believed Hermione
sincere, so she did this to try her, and expected to see her pout and
refuse. To her surprize, Hermione only said "Oh thank you, ma'am,"
with a quite smiling face, and going behind the chair, sat down on the
floor to her worsted. For a few moments the old lady kept thinking "It
won't last long: she'll soon be glad of an excuse to come out:" but no
such thing happened; and just what Hermione expected did happen. The
ladies fell to talking among themselves, and in a very short time the
presence of the little girl was quite forgotten, even by the old lady,
who was handed out to dinner, without once remembering whom she had
left behind her chair.
Hermione stayed in the room till her task was over, and then rushed up
stairs to the nursery, and stopping at the door, half opened it and
rolled the great grey worsted ball so cleverly in, that it hit the old
Nurse's foot as she sat (once more rocking the baby) over the fire.
"Goodness, bless me! what ever is that?" Then, spying a laughing face
at the door, "Oh dear heart, it's you I declare, Miss Hermione! will
you never leave off waking the baby? I thought a great black dog was
laying hold of my foot."
"Nurse," said Hermione, "your baby is always and always going to
sleep; why doesn't he go, and then I could have a bit of fun? You
don't know where I finished winding the worsted ball!"
"Why goodness me, Miss Hermione, where?"
"Down in the drawing-room among all the fine ladies; so good night!"
and off she ran to avoid further explanation. A few words with her
Governess; a sober time of evening prayer; and the happy child laid
her head on her pillow, and needed no Fairy wand to lull her to sleep.
She had been some time with her Governess in the morning before her
Mamma coming to her there, heard a loud discussion going on within.
The voices, however, were those of good-humour. "Hermione," said her
Mother, "I am come to say that your Governess told me yesterday you
had been so very good for a long time over all that you have had to
do, that I have arranged for your having a holiday and a treat to-day,
and several of your young friends are coming to see you. Among them is
Aurora, the granddaughter of the old lady in spectacles, who, just
before she was going away at night, recollected you, and began to look
for you behind her chair."
"Oh what a goose, Mamma!" "No, not a goose, my dear--only an oddity,
but a very kind one too--for she desired me to find out whether you
really did roll up the whole of the ravelled worsted last night; and
if you really persevered till it was finished, I have something to
give you from her, but not otherwise. How was it?" "Oh, it's finished,
Mamma; ask Nurse; for when I rolled it against her foot last night,
she took it for a great black dog." "Well then, I suppose this is
yours, Hermione; but, I must say, I never knew a gold thimble earned
so easily." Yes, dear little readers, it was a pretty gold thimble,
and round the bottom of it there was a rim of white enamel, and on the
enamel were gold letters.
  "L'industrie ajoute à la beauté."
"Mamma," said Hermione, looking at it in delight, as she found it
exactly fitted her finger, "it's lovely; but, do you know, I think the
old lady ought to have given it to her granddaughter, Aurora, with
such a motto." "My dear, she has had it, she told me, some months in
her pocket secretly, for the purpose you mention, but she cannot ever
satisfy herself that Aurora has got the spirit of real industry in
her, and to bribe her to earn the thimble is not her object, so you
see it has accidentally fallen to your share."
And as she said this, Hermione's mother turned round to leave the
room; but before she had reached the door, her little girl stopped
her--"Mamma, do turn back."
"What is the matter, Hermione?"
"I've something I want to say to you."
"I am all attention, my dear, particularly as your face looks so
unusually grave."
"Why, you and my Governess are always calling me good for doing my
lessons well, and now you are rewarding me for being good and all
that, and I don't see that I am good at all."
"Upon my word this is a very serious matter, Hermione; who or what has
put this into your head?"
"I read in a serious book lately, that nobody could be good without
practising self-denial; and that, to be really good, one must either
do something that one does not like, or give up something that one
does; so that I am quite sure I cannot be good and deserve a reward
when I do French and music and drawing and work well, because I am so
very fond of doing every thing I do do, that every thing is a pleasure
to me. And there is no struggle to do what is tiresome and no other
wish to give up. The only time when I have to try to be good at all,
is when I have to leave off one thing and go to another. That is
always a little disagreeable at first, but unfortunately the
disagreeableness goes off in a very few minutes, and I like the new
employment as well as the last. This is what I was talking about to my
Governess when you came, and she laughed so loud I felt quite vexed."
"My dear Hermione," said her Mamma, "you have quite misapplied what
you have read in the book. Self-denial is always required of us, when
we feel inclined to do any thing that is wrong, but it does not apply
to any aptitude you may have for enjoying the occupations I require of
you. That is only a piece of good fortune for you; for to many little
girls, doing lessons is a very great act of self-denial, as they want
to be doing something else. But now, as you are so lucky in liking
every thing you do, you must practise your self-denial in some other
way."
"How, Mamma?"
"In not being vexed when your Governess laughs, and in not being in a
passion with the cat next time he unravels your stocking."
Hermione blushed. "Oh, Mamma, I understand the difference now."
"But this is not all, Hermione."
"Well, Mamma?"
"Why, as you are so fortunate as to be always happy when employed, and
as therefore there is no goodness strictly speaking, in your doing
your business so cheerfully and well, you must do this, you must spend
some portion of time every day in making your energy of use to other
people, and then you will be doing active good if not practising
self-denial."
"Oh, Mamma, what a nice idea! Perhaps you will give me some needlework
to do for the poor women you give money to; and, besides, just now I
can do something actively useful and still a little really
disagreeable,--really it is, Mamma,--what makes you laugh?"
"Your resolution to do something you don't like. What is it,
Hermione?"
"To knit up again the stocking the cat pulled out. I quite dislike the
idea."
"Then set to work by all means, Hermione. You will at least have the
comfort of 'beginning by a little aversion;' but I warn you
beforehand, not to set your heart upon the disagreeableness lasting
very long, and if you find yourself shortly, as happy as ever over the
stocking, do not be puzzled and vexed any more, but thank God as I do,
that, so far at least, you are spared one of the troubles of life. The
trouble of an indolent, discontented mind."
An affectionate embrace was exchanged between Mother and Daughter; and
the latter, with the assistance of her Governess, recommenced the
unlucky grey stocking, and was working assiduously at it when her
young friends arrived.
It was a curious sight to the Fairies to see two of their
god-daughters together, as they now did. But the conviction was forced
upon them, that, for the present at least, Hermione had the balance of
happiness in her favour. Whatever their amusements were,--whether
looking over curiosities, playing with dolls, or any of the numerous
games invented for the entertainment of the young, Hermione's whole
heart and attention were in the matter, and she was as much engrossed
as over learning at other times, and quite happy. With poor Aurora it
was not so; the childishness of the play every now and then annoyed
her; there was no food for her vanity, in playing with children; they
cared nothing about her beauty; the gayest and most good-natured face
has always the most charms for them, and this did not suit Aurora at
all, and ever and anon her thoughts wandered, and her wishes too.
For ever straining into the future!
"I cannot make out your Fairy gift at all, Ambrosia," said Euphrosyne,
"and I begin to suspect you have not given her one."
"We are all growing philosophical, I perceive," said Ambrosia,
smiling. "Who could think you would have guessed that my happy child
has had no Fairy gift at all. But she has, I assure you. What do you
say to the Philosopher's Stone? It is quite clear that me has got
something which TURNS EVERY THING SHE TOUCHES INTO GOLD."
What is the Philosopher's Stone? I hear my little readers exclaim.
There is no such thing, my dears, nor ever was; but the chymists in
old times, who were very ignorant, and yet knew that many wonderful
things had been done by the mixture of minerals and metals, and the
curious effects some had upon others, guessed that yet more wonderful
things might be found out by searching, and they got into their heads
that it might be possible to find, or make, a stone that would have
the power of turning every thing it touched into gold. In the same
manner, the doctors of those times fancied there might be such a thing
made as a draught that would turn old people into young ones again.
This was called "The Elixir of Life." But I do assure you these old
fellows never did discover either a Philosopher's Stone, or an Elixir
of Life.
So this was only a joke of Ambrosia's.
Now to go on and finish my story. It was ten years more before the
Fairies revisited their Godchildren in the lower world, and this time
they were to decide who had given the best Fairy gift.
And I dare say you expect me to give you as long an account of their
visits to the young ladies of twenty, as I did of their peeps at the
little girls of ten. But I really do not think it worth while. I would
do so indeed in a minute if there were anything quite fresh and new to
describe. But on the faith of a story-teller I assure you, it would be
"the old story over again," only on an enlarged scale.
Did you ever look at any interesting object first with your natural
eyes, and then through a microscope or magnifying glass? If so, you
will remember that through the magnifying glass you saw the same thing
again, only much bigger.
In the same manner the ten years acted as a sort of magnifying glass
over Aurora, Julia, and Hermione. Everything was the same, but
increased in size and made clearer and plainer.
Aurora's triumphant joy as she entered the ball-room as a beauty, was
much greater certainly than her pleasure at her Mamma's dinner party.
But the weariness and anxiety afterwards were increased also. She was
still getting away from our friend Time present, and forecasting into
some future delight. "The good time coming, Boys," was her, as well
as many other people's bugbear. She never could feel that (with God's
blessing) the good time is always come.
The only time she ever thoroughly enjoyed was the moment of being
excessively admired. But judge for yourselves how long that can last.
Could you sit and look at a pretty picture for an hour together? No, I
know you could not. You cannot think how short a time it takes to say
"Dear me, what a beautiful girl!" and then, perhaps, up comes somebody
who addresses the admiring gazer on the subject of Lord John Russel's
last speech, and the "beautiful girl," so all important in her own
eyes, is as entirely forgotten as if she had never been seen. And
then, to let you into another secret, Aurora was by no means a very
entertaining companion: nobody can be, with their heads full of
themselves: and she had often the mortification, even in that scene of
her triumph, a ball-room, of feeing her admirers drop off, to amuse
themselves with other people; less handsome perhaps, but more
interesting than herself.
And so the Fairies, having accompanied her through a day of Triumphs,
mixed with mortifications, followed by languors, unsettled by hopes of
future joy, clouded with anxieties that all but spoilt those
hopes:--came one and all to the conclusion that Aurora could not be
considered as a model of human happiness.
Nor could they say much more for Julia. Perhaps, indeed, there is more
equanimity in the pleasures of a very rich person, than in those of a
very beautiful one: but, oh dear, they are of such a mean sort! Still,
there is a good deal of impertinent comfort in money I do admit. Life
rolls on, upon such well oiled hinges! The rich say, "Do this," to
people around them; and the people, "do it." But the Fairies had no
sympathy with such an unnatural fault as the pride of wealth. They
saw Julia reclining in one of those "lumbering things" they so much
despised: and driving round the "dirty town" they so much disliked:
and along a park a great deal too smoky for their taste: and they
could not understand the haughty glance of self-satisfaction with
which she looked out upon the walking crowds she passed, or the
affected graciousness with which she smiled upon the few whom she
condescended to recognize as acquaintances. They thought her very
naughty and very absurd for being conceited about such matters. They
followed her to her Milliner's too, and there I assure you they had
nearly betrayed their presence by the uncontrollable fits of laughter
they fell into when she was trying on, or talking about, bonnets, head
dresses, gowns, &c. with the affected Frenchwoman who showed them off.
Julia cared for nothing because it was pretty or tasteful, but chose
every thing by its costliness and magnificence. Of course the milliner
assured her that every thing she took a fancy to from its rarity, was
becoming; and then, oh dear! how the Fairies were amused! for poor
Julia looked downright ugly in some of the things she selected, and
still went away as self satisfied as ever, on the old grounds that the
costume was so expensive that none of her acquaintance could get one
like it. This was still her chief comfort! Euphrosyne actually shook
her fist at her as she was going away, and she had the toothache for
the rest of the day, and was extremely cross to her husband in
consequence. For, by the way, Julia had married--and married a
nobleman--a man somewhat older than herself; but he and she had had a
sort of mutual conviction that riches and rank go very well together,
and so they married; and suited very well in this respect, that as
their heads were full of other things they neither claimed nor
required from each other a great amount of affection.
Still, was Julia happy? The Fairies shook their heads. She had
gardens, hot-houses, magnificent collections of curiosities, treasures
that might have softened and opened her heart, if she had made a right
use of them. But riches have a very hardening tendency, and she never
struggled against it.
Then, too, she could get every thing she wanted so easily, that she
cared very little about anything. Life becomes very stale when your
hands are full and you have nothing to ask for.
Her greatest pleasure was to create astonishment and envy among her
associates: but, besides the naughtiness of the feeling, this is a
triumph of very short duration; for most people, when they cannot get
at what they envy, amuse themselves with something else; and then,
what a mortification to see them do this!
"Besides," said the Fairies, "we must follow her into her solitude, to
see if she is happy."
Ah! there, lying back once more in the easy chair, in a dress which--
  "China's gayest art had dyed,"
do you think that self-satisfied, but still uncheerful looking face
tells of happiness?
No! She too, like Aurora, was unoccupied, and forecasting into
futurity for the "good time coming," which so many spend their lives
in craving after and expecting, but which the proud, the selfish and
the idle never reach to.
The Fairies turned from her sorrowful and angry.
In the outskirts of a forest, just where its intricacy had broken away
into picturesque openings, leaving visible some strange old trees with
knotted trunks and mysteriously twisted branches, sat a young girl
sketching. She was intently engaged, but as her eyes were ever and
anon raised from her paper to the opening glade, and one of the old
trees, the Fairies had no difficulty in recognizing their protégée,
Hermione. The laughing face of childhood had become sobered and
refined by sentiment and strength, but contentment and even enjoyment
beamed in her eyes as she thoughtfully and earnestly pursued her
beautiful art. The little beings who hovered around her in that sweet
spot, almost forgot they were not in Fairy land; the air was so full
of sweet odours from ferns and mosses, and the many other delicious
scents you find so constantly in woods.
Besides which, it amused the good souls to watch Hermione's skilful
hand tracing the scene before her; and they felt an admiring delight
when they saw the old tree of the forest reappear on the paper, with
all the shadows and lights the sun just then threw upon it, and they
wondered not a little at the skill with which she gave distance and
perspective to the glade beyond. They felt, too, that though the
drawing they saw rising under the sketcher's hand was not made
powerful by brilliant effects or striking contrasts, it was
nevertheless overflowing with the truth and sentiment of nature. It
was the impression of the scene itself, viewed through the poetry of
the artist's mind; and as the delicate creatures who hung over the
picture, looked at it, they almost longed for it, slight as it was,
that they might carry it away, and hang it up in their fairy palace as
a faithful representation of one of the loveliest spots of earth, the
outskirts of an ancient English forest.
It is impossible to say how long they might not have staid watching
Hermione, but that after a time the sketch was finished, and the young
lady after writing beneath it Schiller's well known line in
Wallenstein, arose. "Das ist das Loos des Schönen auf der Erde."[1]
"Such is the lot of the beautiful upon earth."
The poor tree was marked for felling! Ambrosia was almost affected to
tears, once more. The scene was so beautiful, and the allusion so
touching, and there seemed to her such a charm over her God-daughter
Hermione; she was herself so glad, too, to feel sure that success had
crowned her gift, that, altogether, her Fairy heart grew quite soft.
"You may do as you like about observing Hermione further," cried she.
"But, for my part, I am now satisfied. She is enjoying life to the
uttermost; all its beauties of sight and sound; its outward
loveliness; its inward mysteries. She will never marry but from love,
and one whose heart can sympathise with hers. Ah, Ianthe, what more
has life to give? You will say, she is not beautiful; perhaps not for
a marble statue; but the grace of poetical feeling is in her every
look and action. Ah, she will walk by the side of manhood, turning
even the hard realities of life into beauty by that living well-spring
of sweet thoughts and fancies that I see beaming from her eyes. Look
at her now, Ianthe, and confess that surely that countenance breathes
more beauty than chiselled features can give." And certainly, whether
some mesmeric influence from her enthusiastic Fairy Godmother was
working on Hermione's brain, or whether her own quotation upon the
doomed tree had stirred up other poetical recollections, I know not;
but as she was retracing her steps homewards, she repeated to herself
softly but with much pathos, Coleridge's lines:[2]
      "O lady, we receive but what we give,
      And in our life alone does nature live:
  Ours is her wedding-garment, ours her shroud!
  And would we aught behold, of higher worth,
  Than that inanimate cold world allowed
  To the poor loveless ever anxious crowd,
  Ah! from the soul itself must issue forth
  A light, a glory, a fair luminous cloud
      Enveloping the earth--
  And from the soul itself must there be sent
  A sweet and potent voice, of its own birth,
  Of all sweet sounds the life and element!"
Coleridge's "Dejection: an Ode."
And, turning through the little handgate at the extremity of the wood,
she pursued the train of thought with heightened colour in her
cheeks--
  "I may not hope from outward forms to win
  The passion and the life, whose fountains are within."
And thus Hermione reached her home, her countenance lighted up by the
pleasure of success, and the sweet and healthy musings of her solitary
walk.
She entered the library of a beautiful country house by the low window
that opened on to the lawn, and found her mother reading.
"I cannot tell you how lovely the day is, Mamma, every thing is so
fresh, and the shadows and lights are so good! I have immortalized our
poor old friend the oak, before they cut him down," added she,
smiling, as she placed the drawing in her mother's hands. "I wish the
forest belonged to some one who had not this cruel taste for turning
knotted oak trees into fancy work-tables. It is as bad as what Charles
Lamb said of the firs, 'which look so romantic alive, and die into
desks.'--Die into desks!" repeated Hermione musingly, as she seated
herself on the sofa, and took up a book that was before her on the
table; mechanically removing her bonnet from her head, and laying it
down by her side as she spoke.
And here for some time there was a silence, during which Hermione's
mother ceased reading, and, lifting up her eyes, looked at her
daughter with mingled love, admiration, and interest. "I wish I had
her picture so," dreamt the poor lady, as she gazed; "so earnest, and
understanding, and yet so simple, and kind!--There is but one
difficulty for her in life," was the next thought; "with such keen
enjoyment of this world, such appreciation of the beauties, and
wonders, and delights of God's creations on earth--to keep the eye of
faith firmly fixed on the 'better and more enduring inheritance,' to
which both she and I, but I trust she, far behind, are hastening. Yet,
by God's blessing, and with Christian training, and the habit of
active charity, and the vicissitudes of life, I have few or no fears.
But such capability of happiness in this world is a great temptation,
and I sometimes fancy must therefore have been a Fairy gift." And here
the no longer young Mother of Hermione fell into a reverie, and a long
pause ensued, during which Ambrosia felt very sad, for it grieved her
to think that the good and reasonable Mother should be so much afraid
of Fairy gifts, even when the result had been so favourable.
A note at length interrupted the prolonged silence. It was from Aurora
the Beauty, whose Father possessed a large estate in the
neighbourhood, and who had just then come into the country for a few
weeks. Aurora earnestly requested Hermione and her Mother to visit
her.
"I will do as you wish," said Hermione, looking rather grave; "but
really a visit to Aurora is a sort of small misfortune."
"I hope you are not envious of her beauty, Hermione? Take care."
"Nay, you are cruel, Mamma, now. I should like to be handsome, but not
at the expense of being so very dull in spirits as poor Aurora often
is. But really, unless you have ever spent an hour alone with her, you
can form no idea of how tired one gets."
"What of, Hermione? of her face?"
"Oh no, not of her face; it is charming, and by the way you have just
put into my head how I may escape from being tired, even if I am left
alone with her for hours!"
"Nay, now you really puzzle me, my dear; I suggested nothing but
looking at her face."
"Ah, but as she is really and truly such a model of beauty, what do
you think of offering to make a likeness of her, Mamma? It will
delight her to sit and be looked at, even by me, in the country, and I
shall be so much pleased to have such a pleasant occupation. I am
quite reconciled to the idea of going."
And a note was written, and despatched accordingly.
"But," persisted Hermione, rising to sit near her Mother, "you do not
above half know Aurora. One would think she had been born in what is
called a 'four warnt way,' with nothing but cross roads about her.
Nothing is ever right. She is always either exhausted with the heat of
the sun, or frozen with cold, or the evening is so tedious, she wants
it to be bedtime, or if there is any unusual gaiety going on, she
quarrels with the same length of evening, because it is so intolerably
short; and, in short, she is never truly happy but when she is
surrounded by admirers, whether men or women. And this seems to me to
be a sad way of 'getting her time over,' as the poor women say of
life. Ah, Mamma, it goes but too quickly."
"Aurora is indeed foolish," musingly ejaculated the Mother.
"Not altogether either, my dear Mother. She knows much; but the fault
is, she cares for nothing. She has got the carcase, as it were, of
knowledge and accomplishments; but the vivifying spirit is wanting.
You know yourself how well she plays and sings occasionally, if there
is a question of charming a room full of company. Yet there can be no
sentiment about her music after all, or it would be an equal pleasure
to her at other times. But really it almost makes me as discontented
with life as herself to hear her talk in unexcited hours. Turning over
my books one day, she said, 'You can never be either a poet or a
painter, or a Mozart or a philosopher, Hermione? what is the use of
all your labour and poking?' What could I say? I felt myself colour
up, and I laughed out, 'Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher, all is
vanity!' Yet certainly God has set before us the things of earth in
order that we may admire and find them out; and that is the answer to
all such foolish questions!" And Hermione was turning to leave the
room, but she came back and said--"Do you know, Mamma, though you will
laugh at the idea, I do think Aurora would be a very nice girl, and
very happy, if she either could grow very ugly all at once, or if any
thing in the world could make her forget her beauty.--And," added she,
in a half whisper, "if there is any thing in Fairy lore, I could
almost fancy some cruel Fairy had owed her family a grudge, and had
given her this gift of excessive beauty on purpose to be the plague
and misfortune of her life."
"Enough, enough, and too much," cried Euphrosyne impatiently. "The
matter is now, I think, concluded. Ianthe and I have failed, and
though you are successful, Ambrosia, even you have not come off
without a rebuff. Now, farewell to earth. I am weary of it. I do not
know your gift, and I am sick of listening to conversations I cannot
understand. Let us begone. If we de delay, they will begin again. Ah,
my sisters, my spirit yearns for our fairer clime!"
And they arose; but yet awhile they lingered on the velvet lawn before
that country-house, for as they were preparing for flight, the sounds
they loved so well, of harmonious music, greeted their ears.
"Ah, there is the artist's hand again," cried Ambrosia. "I see the
lovely sketch before me once more!"
And so it was, that it, and the peaceful forest scene, and the
interesting face of Hermione, seemed to reappear before them all as
they listened to her music. Tender, and full of sentiment were the
sounds at first, as if the musician were acting the scene of the opera
whence they came.
"Lieder ohne Worte,"murmured Ambrosia.
Songs without Words.--Mendelssohn.
But it was to the swelling sounds of a farewell chorus that they arose
into the air, and took their leave of earth.
And now, dear Readers, there is but one thing more to do. To ask if
you have guessed the Fairy gift?
The Fairies, you see, had not. What Euphrosyne had said was true. They
had listened to such a quantity of conversation they could not
understand, and they were so unused to think much about any thing,
or to hear much beyond their own pretty light talk and sweet songs,
that their poor little brains had got quite muddled.
Perhaps remaining so long in the Earth's atmosphere helped to cloud
their intelligence. Certain it is, they returned very pensive, very
cross, and rather dusty to Fairy Land.
They arrived at the beautiful bay I first described, and floated to a
large party of their sisters, who were dancing on the sands.
There was a clapping of tiny hands, and shouts of joy as they
approached; and "What news? what news?" cried many voices.
"Ah, what news, Sister Euphrosyne!" cried little Aglaia, floating
forward, "from the smudgy old earth; Is it beauty, riches, or what?"
"I cannot answer your question," said Euphrosyne, pushing forward.
A circle was now formed round the travellers, and the details I have
given you were made by Ianthe. And she wound up by saying, "And what
Ambrosia's gift to Hermione has been, we cannot make out."
"Then I will tell you!" cried little Aglaia, springing lightly high
into the air, and descending gently on a huge shell at her feet; "She
likes every thing she does, and she likes to be always doing
something. You can't put the meaning into one word, as you can Beauty
and Riches; but still it is something. Can't you think of some way
of saying what I have told you? Dear me, how stupid you are all grown.
And liking isn't the right word: it is something stronger than
common liking."
"Love, perhaps," murmured Leila.
"An excellent idea," cried Euphrosyne; "dear me, this delicious air is
clearing my poor head. Sisters, I will express it for you, and
Ambrosia shall say if I am right. It is THE LOVE OF EMPLOYMENT."
Ambrosia laughed assent; but a low murmur of discontent resounded
through the Fairy group.
"Intolerable!" cried Leila, shrugging her shoulders like a French
woman.
"It is no Fairy gift at all," exclaimed others; "it is downright
plodding and working."
"If the human race can be made happy by nothing but labour," cried
another; "I propose we leave them to themselves, and give them no more
Fairy gifts at all."
"Remember," cried Ambrosia, now coming forward, "this is our first
experiment upon human happiness. Hitherto we have given Fairy gifts,
and never enquired how they have acted. And I feel sure we have always
forgotten one thing, viz. that poor men and women living in Time, and
only having in their power the small bit of it which is present,
cannot be happy unless they make Time present happy. And there is but
one plan for that; I use Aglaia's words: 'To like every thing you do,
and like to be always doing something.'"
Ambrosia ceased speaking, and the circled group were silent too. They
were not satisfied, however; but those sweet, airy people take nothing
to heart for long. For a short time they wandered about in little
knots of two and three, talking, and then joined together in a dance
and song, ere night surrounded them. There was from that time,
however, a general understanding among them that the human race was
too coarse and common to have much sympathy with Fairies, and even the
Godmothers agreed to this, for they were sadly tired with the unusual
quantity of thinking and observing they had had to undergo. So if you
ever wonder, dear Readers, that Fairy Gifts and Fairy Godmothers have
gone out of fashion; you may conclude that the adventure of Ambrosia
and Hermione is the reason.
The story is ended; and if any enquiring child should say, "There are
no more Fairy gifts, and we can no more give ourselves love of
employment than beauty or riches;" let me correct this dangerous
error! Wiser heads than mine have shown that every thing we do becomes
by HABIT, not only easy, but actually agreeable.[4]
Abercrombie. Moral Feelings.
Dear Children! encourage a habit of attention to whatever you
undertake, and you may make that habit not only easy, but agreeable;
and then, I will venture to promise you, you will like and even
love your occupations. And thus, though you may not have so many
talents as Hermione, you may call all those you do possess, into play,
and make them the solace, pleasure and resources of your earthly
career.
If you do this, I think you will not feel disposed to quarrel, as the
Fairies did, with Ambrosia's gift; for increased knowledge of the
world, and your own happy experience, will convince you more and more
that no Fairy Gift is so well worth having, as,
THE LOVE OF EMPLOYMENT.
JOACHIM THE MIMIC.
There was, once upon a time, a little boy, who, living in the time
when Genies and Fairies used now and then to appear, had all the
advantage of occasionally seeing wonderful sights, and all the
disadvantage of being occasionally dreadfully frightened. This
little boy was one day walking alone by the sea side, for he lived in
a fishing town, and as he was watching the tide, he perceived a bottle
driven ashore by one of the big waves. He rushed forward to catch it
before the wave sucked it back again, and succeeded. Now then he was
quite delighted, but he could not get the cork out, for it was
fastened down with rosin, and there was a seal on the top. So being
very impatient, he took a stone and knocked the neck of the bottle
off.
What was his surprize to find himself instantly suffocated with a
smoke that made his eyes smart and his nose sneeze, just as much as if
a quantity of Scotch snuff had been thrown over him! He jumped about
and puffed a good deal, and was just beginning to cry, as a matter of
course for a little boy when he is annoyed; when lo! and behold! he
saw before him such an immense Genie, with black eyes and a long
beard, that he forgot all about crying and began to shake with fear.
The Genie told him he need not be afraid, and desired him not to
shake; for, said he, "You have been of great use to me; a Genie,
stronger than myself, had fastened me up in yonder bottle in a fit of
ill humour, and as he had put his seal at the top, nobody could draw
the cork. Luckily for me, you broke the neck of the bottle, and I am
free. Tell me therefore, good little boy, what shall I do for you to
show my gratitude?"
But now, before I go on with this, I must tell you that the day before
the little boy's adventure with the bottle and the Genie, the King of
that country had come to the fishing town I spoke of, in a gold
chariot drawn by twelve beautiful jet black horses, and attended by a
large train of officers and followers. A herald went before announcing
that the King was visiting the towns of his dominions, for the sole
purpose of doing justice and exercising acts of charity and kindness.
And all people in trouble and distress were invited to come and lay
their complaints before him. And accordingly they did so, and the good
King, though quite a youth, devoted the whole day to the benevolent
purpose he proposed; and it is impossible to describe the amount of
good he accomplished in that short time. Among others who benefited
was our little boy's Mother, a widow who had been much injured and
oppressed. He redressed her grievances, and in addition to this,
bestowed valuable and useful presents upon her. "Look what an example
the young King sets," was the cry on every side! "Oh, my son, imitate
him!" exclaimed our poor Widow, as in a transport of joy and emotion,
she threw her arms around her boy's neck. "I wish I could imitate
him and be like him!" murmured little Joachim: (such was the child's
name). "My boy," cried the Widow, "imitate every thing that is good,
and noble, and virtuous, and you will be like him!" Joachim looked
earnestly in her face, but was silent. He understood a good deal that
his Mother meant; he knew he was to try to do every thing that was
good, and so be like the young King; but, as he was but a little boy,
I am not quite sure that he had not got a sort of vague notion of the
gold chariot and the twelve jet black horses, mixed up with his idea
of imitating all that was good and noble and virtuous, and being like
the young King. I may be wrong; but, at seven years old, you will
excuse him if his head did get a little confused, and if he could not
quite separate his ideas of excessive virtue and goodness from all the
splendour in which the pattern he was to imitate appeared before his
eyes.
However that may be, his Mother's words made a profound impression
upon him. He thought of nothing else, and if he had been in the silly
habit of telling his dreams, I dare say he would have told his mother
next morning that he had been dreaming of them. Certainly they came
into his head the first thing in the morning; and they were still in
his head when he walked along by the sea-shore, as has been described;
so much so, that even his adventure did not make him forget them; and
therefore, when this Genie, as I told you before, offered to do any
thing he wanted, little Joachim said, "Genie, I want to imitate every
thing that is good, and noble, and virtuous, so you must make me
able!"
The Genie looked very much surprized, and rather confused; he expected
to have been asked for toys, or money, or a new horse, or something
nice of that sort; but Joachim looked very grave, so the Genie saw he
was in earnest, and he did a most wonderful thing for a Genie; he
actually sat down beside the little boy to talk to him. I don't
recollect that a single Genie in the Arabian Nights, ever did such a
thing before; but this Genie did: What is more, he stroked his beard,
and spoke very softly, as follows:
"My dear little boy, you have asked a great thing. I can do part of
what you wish, but not all; for you have asked what concerns the heart
and conscience, and we Genies, cannot influence these, for the great
Ruler of all things alone has them under his control. He allows us,
however, power over the intellect--ah! now I see you cannot understand
me, little boy!--Well! I mean this;--I can make your head clever, but
I cannot make your heart good: I can give you the power of imitation,
but as to what you imitate, that must depend upon yourself, and the
great Being I dare not name!"
After saying this, the Genie laid his immense forefingers on each side
of Joachim's head just above his forehead, and then disappeared.
Joachim felt no pain, but when he got up and put on his cap to go
home, his head seemed almost too large for it.
Perhaps he wanted a new cap, but the phrenologists would tell you he
had got the organ of Imitation.
He did not thoroughly understand what the Genie said, but he was
convinced that something had been done towards making him like to the
young King. As he was dawdling home, his eye was struck by the sight
of a beautiful because picturesque dark fishing-boat, which he saw
very plainly, because the red sun was setting behind it. Joachim felt
a strange wish to make something like it; and, taking up a bit of
white chalk he saw at his feet, he drew a picture of the boat on the
tarred side of another that was near him. While he was so engaged, an
old fisherman came up very angrily. He thought the child was
disfiguring his boat; but, to his surprise, he saw that the little
fellow's drawing was so capital, he wished he could do as much
himself.
"Why, who taught you to do that, young Master?" said he.
Joachim was no great talker at any time, and he now merely said,
"Nobody," and smiled.
"Well, you must draw my boat some day, for me to hang up; and now
here's a luck penny for you, for you certainly are a capital hand for
such a youngster."
Joachim was greatly pleased with the penny, for it was a curious old
one, with a hole through it; and he told his Mother all about it; but
though it may seem strange, he never mentioned the bottle and the
Genie to her at all. That appeared to him to be a quite private affair
of his own.
He altered very much, however, by degrees. He had been till then
rather a dull, silent boy: now he talked much more, was more amusing,
was always endeavouring to draw, and after being at church would try
to read the prayers like the parson. His Mother was delighted. She
began to think her son would grow up a good scholar after all, and
being now well off, owing to the King's kindness, she resolved on
sending little Joachim to school.
To school, accordingly, he went; and here, my little readers, there
was a great change for him. Hitherto he had lived very much alone with
his Mother, and being quiet, and somewhat dull by nature, he had never
till quite lately had many acquaintances of his own age.
Now, however, he found himself among great numbers of youths, of all
ages, and all characters. At first he was shy and observant, but this
soon wore off, and he became a favourite. Nobody was more liked at any
time, and he was completely unrivalled in the play-ground. He could
set all the boys in a roar of laughter, when, hid behind a bush, he
would bark so like a dog that the unhappy wights who were not in the
secret expected to see a vicious hound spring out upon them, and took
to their heels in fright. He was first in every attempt at acting,
which the boys got up; and there was not a cat nor a pig in the
neighbourhood whose mew and squeak he could not give with the utmost
exactness. If you ask how he got on at lessons, I must say--well, but
not very well. His powers of entertaining his companions were so
great, that I fear he found their easily-acquired praise more tempting
than the rewards of laborious learning. He could learn easily enough,
it is true; but while his steadier neighbours were working hard, he
was devising some new scheme for fun when lessons should be over, or
making some odd drawing on his slate to induce his companions to an
outburst of laughter.
There were many excuses to be made for little Joachim; and it is
always so pleasant to please, that I do not much wonder at his being
led astray by possessing the power.
Time went on, meanwhile; and Joachim became aware at last that he
possessed a larger share than common of the power of imitation. When
he first clearly felt this, he thought of the Genie and his two
forefingers, I believe;--but his school life, and his funny ways, and
the constant diversion of his mind, quite prevented his thinking of
all the serious things the Genie had spoken. Nay, even his Mother's
words had nearly faded from his mind, and he had forgotten the young
King, and his own wishes to be like him. It was a pity it was so; but
so it was! Poor Joachim! he was a very good fellow, and kind also in
reality; but first the pleasure of making his companions laugh, and
then the pleasure of being a sort of little great man among them, were
fast misleading him. For instance, though at first he amused them by
imitating dogs, and cats, and pigs, he next tried his powers at
imitating any thing queer and odd in the boys themselves, and, for a
time, this was most entertaining. When he mimicked the awkward walk of
one boy, and the bad drawl of another, and the loutish carriage of a
third, the school resounded with shouts of laughter, which seemed to
our Hero a great triumph,--something like the cheers which had greeted
the good young King as he left the fishing-town. But certainly the
cause was a very different one! By degrees, however, it must be
admitted, that Joachim's popularity began a little to decrease; for,
though a boy has no objection to see his neighbour laughed at, he does
not like quite so well to be laughed at himself, and there are very
few who can bear it with good humour. And now Joachim had given such
way to the pastime, that he was always hunting up absurdities in his
friends and neighbours, and no one felt safe.
It was a long time before Joachim found out the change that was taking
place, for there were still plenty of loud laughers on his side; but
once or twice he had a feeling that all was not right: for instance,
one day when he mimicked the awkward walker to the boy who spoke badly
and stuttered, and then in the afternoon imitated the stutterer to the
awkward boy, he had a twinge of conscience, for it whispered to him
that he was a sneak, and deceitful; particularly, as both these boys
had often helped him in doing his sums and lessons when he was too
idle and too funny to labour at them himself. In fact, he had been
so much helped that he was sadly behind hand in his books, for all the
school had been willing to assist "that good fellow 'Joke him,'" as
they called him.
At last a crisis came. A new boy arrived at the school; very big for
his age, and rather surly tempered, but a hard working, persevering
lad, who was striving hard to learn and get on. He had one defect. He
lisped very much, which certainly is an ugly trick, and sounded silly
in a great stout boy, nearly five feet high: but he had this excuse;
--his mother had died when he was very little, and his good Father had
more important business on hand in supporting his family, of which
this boy was the eldest, than in teaching him to pronounce his S's
better. It is perhaps only Mothers who attend to these little matters.
Well;--this great big boy was two or three days at the school before
Joachim went near him. There was something serious, stern, and unfunny
in his face, and when Joachim was making the other boys laugh, the
great big boy never even smiled, but fixed his eyes in a rather
unpleasant manner upon Joachim as he raised them from his books. Still
he was an irresistible subject for the Mimic; for, though he learnt
his lessons without a mistake, and always obtained the Master's
praise, he read them with so strong a lisp, and this was rendered so
remarkable by his loud, deep voice, that it fairly upset what little
prudence Joachim possessed; and, as he returned one day to his seat,
after repeating a copy of verses in the manner I have described,
Joachim, who was not far off, echoed the last two lines with such
accuracy of imitation, that it startled even the Master, who was at
that moment leaving the school-room.
But no laugh followed as usual, for all eyes were suddenly turned on
the big boy, who, crimson with indignation, and yet quite
self-possessed in manner, walked up to Joachim and deliberately
knocked him down on the floor. Great was Joachim's amazement, you may
be sure, and severe was the blow that had levelled him; but still more
severe were the words that followed. "Young rascal," exclaimed the big
boy, "who has put you in authority over your elders, that you are to
be correcting our faults and failings, instead of attending to your
own. You are beholden to any lad in the school who will do your sums,
and write your exercises for you, and then you take upon yourself to
ridicule us if we cannot pronounce our well learnt lessons to your
fancy! You saucy imp, who don't know what labour and good conduct are,
and who have nothing to boast of, but the powers which a monkey
possesses to a greater extent than yourself!" Fancy Joachim's rage!
He, the admired wit! the popular boy! nothing better than a monkey!
He sprang up and struck his fist into the face of his antagonist with
such fury, that the big boy, though evidently unwilling to fight one
less than himself, was obliged to bestow several sharp blows before he
could rid himself of Joachim's passion.
At last, however, other boys separated them; but Joachim, who was
quite unused to fighting, and who had received a very severe shock
when he first fell, became so sick and ill that he was obliged to go
home. His Mother asked what was the matter. "He had been quizzing a
great big boy who lisped, and the boy knocked him down, and they had
fought." His Mother sighed; but she saw he was too poorly for talking,
so she put him to bed and nursed him carefully.
Now, you may say, what had this Mother been about, not to have found
out and corrected Joachim's fault before? First, he was very little at
home, and as owing to the help of others, his idleness had not become
notorious, she had heard no complaints from the Masters, and thinking
he did his lessons well, she felt averse to stopping his fun and
amusements in holiday hours. Still, she had latterly begun to have
misgivings which this event confirmed. In a few days Joachim was
better, and came down stairs, and his Aunt and two or three Cousins
called to enquire after him. Their presence revived Joachim's flagging
spirits, and all the boys got together to talk and laugh. Soon their
voices echoed through the house. Joachim was at his old tricks again,
and the Schoolboys, the Ushers and the Master all furnished food for
mirth. His Cousins roared with delight. "Clever child!" exclaimed his
Aunt, "what a treasure you are in a house! one could never be dull
where you are!" "Sister, Sister!" cried Joachim's Mother, "do not
say so!" "My dear," said the Aunt, "are you dull enough to be unable
to appreciate your own child's wit; oh, I wish you would give him to
me. Come here, my dear Joachim, and do the boy that walks so badly
once more for me; it's enough to kill one to see you take him off!"
Joachim's spirits rose above all control. Excited by his Aunt's
praise and the sense of superior ability, he surpassed himself. He
gave the bad walker to perfection; then imitated a lad who had
commenced singing lessons, and whose voice was at present broken and
bad. He even gave the big boy's lisp once more, and followed on with a
series of pantomimic exhibitions.
All at once, he cast his eyes on his Mother's face--that face so full
of intelligence and the mild sorrow of years of widowhood, borne with
resigned patience. Her eyes were full of tears, and there was not a
smile on her countenance. Joachim's conscience--he knew not
why--twinged him terribly. He stopped suddenly; "Mother!"
"Come here, Joachim!" He came.
"Is that boy whom you have been imitating--your Aunt says so
cleverly--the best walker of all the boys in your school?"
"The best, Mother?" and the puzzled Joachim could not suppress a
smile. His Cousins grinned.
"Dear Mother, of course not," continued Joachim, "on the contrary, he
is the very worst!"
"Oh--well, have you no good walkers at your school?"
"Oh yes, several; indeed one especially; his father was a soldier, he
walks beautifully."
"Does he, Joachim? Let me see you walk like him, my dear."
Joachim stepped boldly enough into the middle of the room, and drew
himself up; but a sudden consciousness of his extreme inferiority to
the soldier's son, both in figure, manner and mode of walking, made
him feel quite sheepish. There was a pause of expectation.
"Now then!" said Joachim's Mother.
"I cannot walk like him, Mother," said Joachim.
"Why not?"
"Because he walks so very well!"
"Oh,"--said Joachim's Mother.
There was another pause.
"Come, Joachim," continued the Widow, "I am very anxious to admire you
as much as your Aunt does. You are not tired; let us have some more
exhibitions. You gave us a song just now horribly out of tune, and
with the screeching voice of a bagpipe."
"I was singing like Tom Smith," interrupted Joachim.
"Is he your best singer?" enquired the Mother. Another laugh followed.
"Nay, Mother, no one sings so badly."
"Indeed! How does the Singing Master sing, Joachim?"
"Oh, Mother," cried Joachim, "so beautifully, it would make the tears
come into your eyes with pleasure, to listen to him."
"Well, but as I cannot listen to him, let me, at all events, have the
pleasure of hearing my clever son imitate him," was the reply.
Joachim was mute. He had a voice, though not a remarkable one, but he
had shirked the labour of trying to improve it by practice. He made
one effort to sing like the Master, but overpowered by a sense of
incapacity, his voice failed, and he felt disposed to cry.
"Why, Joachim, I thought you were such a clever creature you could
imitate any thing," cried the Mother.
No answer fell from the abashed boy, till a sudden thought revived
him.
"But I can imitate the singing-master, Mother."
"Let me hear you, my dear child."
"Why it isn't exactly what you can hear," observed Joachim
murmuringly; "but when he sings, you have no idea what horrible faces
he makes. Nay, it's true, indeed, he turns up his eyes, shuts them,
distorts his mouth, and swings about on the stool like the pendulum of
a clock!"
And Joachim performed all the grimaces and contortions to perfection,
till his Aunt and Cousins were convulsed with laughter.
"Well done," cried his Mother. "Now you are indeed like the cat in the
German fable, Joachim! who voted himself like the bear, because he
could lick his paws after the same fashion, though he could not
imitate either his courage or his strength. Now let me look a little
further into your education. Bring me your drawing-book." It came, and
there was page after page of odd and ugly faces, strange noses,
stranger eyes, squinting out of the book in hideous array.
"I suppose you will laugh again if I ask you if these are the
beauties of your school, Joachim;--but tell me seriously, are there
no good, pleasant, or handsome faces among your schoolfellows?"
"Plenty, Mother; one or two the Master calls models, and who often sit
to him to be drawn from."
"Draw one of those faces for me, my dear; I am fond of beauty." And
the Mother placed the book in his hands, pointing to a blank page.
Joachim took a pencil, and sat down. Now he thought he should be
able to please his Mother; but, alas, he found to his surprise, that
the fine faces he tried to recall had not left that vivid impression
on his brain which enabled him to represent them. On the contrary, he
was tormented and baffled by visions of the odd forms and grotesque
countenances he had so often pictured. He seized the Indian-rubber and
rubbed out nose after nose to no purpose, for he never could replace
them with a better. Drawing was his favourite amusement; and this
disappointment, where he expected success, broke down his already
depressed heart. He threw the book from him, and burst into a flood of
tears.
"Joachim! have you drawn him? What makes you cry?"
"I cannot draw him, Mother," sobbed the distressed boy.
"And why not? Just look here; here is an admirable likeness of
squinting Joe, as you have named him. Why cannot you draw the handsome
boy?"
"Because his face is so handsome!" answered Joachim, still sobbing.
"My son," said his Mother gravely, "you have now a sad lesson to
learn, but a necessary and a wholesome one. Get up, desist from
crying, and listen to me."
Poor Joachim, who loved his mother dearly, obeyed.
"Joachim! your Aunt, and your Cousins, and your schoolfellows have all
called you clever. In what does your cleverness consist? I will tell
you. In the Reproduction of Deformity, Defects, Failings, and
Misfortunes of every sort, that fall under your observation. A worthy
employment truly! A noble ambition! But I will now tell you the truth
about yourself. You never heard it before, and I feel sure you will
benefit now. A good or an evil Genie, I know not which, has bestowed
upon you a great power; and you have misused it. Do you know what that
power is?"
Joachim shook his head, though he trembled all over, for he felt as if
awaking from along dream, to the recollection of the Genie.
"It is the power of Imitation, Joachim; I call it a great power, for
it is essential to many great and useful things. It is essential to
the orator, the linguist, the artist, and the musician. Nature herself
teaches us the charm of imitation, when in the smooth and clear lake
you see the lovely landscape around mirrored and repeated.What a
lesson may we not read in this sight! The commonest pond even that
reflects the foliage of the tree that hangs over it, is calling out to
us to reproduce for the solace and ornament of life, the beautiful
works of God. But oh, my son, my dear son, you have abused this gift
of Imitation, which might be such a blessing and pleasure to you."
Schiller.--"Der Künstler."
"You might, if you chose, imitate every thing that is good, and
noble, and virtuous, and beautiful; and you are, instead of that,
reproducing every aspect of deformity that crosses your path, until
your brain is so stamped with images of defects, ugliness, and
uncouthness, that your hand and head refuse their office, when I call
upon you to reproduce the beauties with which the world is graced."
I doubt if Joachim heard the latter part of his Mother's speech. At
the recurrence to the old sentence, a gleam of lightning seemed to
shoot across his brain. Latent memories were aroused as keenly as if
the events had but just occurred, and he sank at his Mother's feet.
When she ceased to speak, he arose.
"Mother," said he, "I have been living in a cloud. I have been very
wrong. Besides which, I have a secret to tell you. Nay, my Aunt may
hear. It has been a secret, and then it has been forgotten; but now I
remember all, and understand far more than I once did."
Here Joachim recounted to his Mother the whole story of her words to
him, and his adventure with the Genie and the bottle; and then, very
slowly, and interrupted by many tears of repentance, he repeated what
the Genie had said about giving him the power of imitation, adding
that the use he made of it must depend on himself and the great Ruler
of the heart and conscience.
There was a great fuss among the Cousins at the notion of Joachim
having talked to a Genie; and, to tell you the truth, this was all
they thought about, and soon after took their leave. The heart of
Joachim's Mother was at rest, however: for though she knew how hard
her son would find it to alter what had become a habit of life, she
knew that he was a good and pious boy, and she saw that he was fully
alive to his error.
"Oh Mother," said he, during the course of that evening, "how plain I
see it all now! The boy that stutters is a model of obedience and
tenderness; I ought to have dwelt upon and imitated that, and, oh! I
thought only of his stuttering. The boy that walks so clumsily, as
well as the great fellow that lisps, are such industrious lads, and so
advanced in learning, that the master thinks both will be
distinguished hereafter; and I, who--(oh, my poor mother, I must
confess to you)--hated to labour at any thing, and have got the boys
to do my lessons for me;--I, instead of imitating their industry, lost
all my time in ridiculing their defects.--What shall--what shall I
do!"
The next morning poor Joachim said his prayers more humbly than he had
ever before done in his life; and, kissing his mother, went to school.
The first thing he did on arriving was to go up to the big boy, who
had beaten him, and beg him to shake hands.
The big boy was pleased, and a grim smile lightened up his face. "But,
old fellow," said he, laying his hand on Joachim's shoulder, "take a
friend's advice. There is good in all of us, depend upon it. Look out
for all that's good, and let the bad points take care of themselves.
You won't get any handsomer, by squinting like poor Joe; nor speak
any pleasanter for lisping like me; nor walk any better for apeing
hobbling. But the ugliest of us have some good about us. Look out for
that, my little lad; I do, or I should not be talking to you! I see
that you are honest and forgiving, though you are a monkey! There
now, I must go on with my lessons! You do yours!"
Never was better advice given, and Joachim took it well, and bore it
bravely; but, oh, how hard it was to his mind, accustomed for so long
to wander away and seek amusement at wrong times, to settle down
resolutely and laboriously to study. He made a strong effort, however;
and though he had often to recall his thoughts, he in a measure
succeeded.
After school-hours he begged the big boy to come and sit by him, and
then he requested his old friends and companions to listen to a story
he had to tell them. They expected something funny, and many a broad
grin was seen; but poor Joachim's eyes were yet red with weeping, and
his gay voice was so subdued, the party soon became grave and
wondering, and then Joachim told them every thing. They were delighted
to hear about the Genie, and were also pleased to find themselves safe
from Joachim's ridicule. It could not be expected they should all
understand the story, but the big boy did, and became Joachim's
greatest friend and adviser.
That evening our little friend, exhausted with the efforts and
excitement of his almost first day of repentance, strolled out in a
somewhat pensive mood to his favourite haunt, the sea shore. A stormy
sunset greeted his arrival on the beach, but the tide was ebbing, and
he wandered on till he reached some caverns among the cliffs. And
there, as had often been his wont, he sat down to gaze out upon the
waste of waters safe and protected from harm. It is very probable that
he fell asleep--but the point could never be clearly known, for he
always said it was no sleep and no dream he had then, but that, whilst
sitting in the inmost recesses of the cave, he saw once more his old
friend the Genie, who after reproaching him with the bad use he had
made of his precious gift, gave him a world of good advice and
instruction.
There is no doubt that after that time, Joachim was seen daily
struggling against his bad habits; and that by degrees he became able
to exercise his mind in following after the good and beautiful instead
of after the bad and ugly. It was a hard task to him for many a long
day to fix his flighty thoughts down to the business in hand, and to
dismiss from before his eyes the ridiculous images that often
presented themselves. But his Mother's wishes, or the Genie's advice,
or something better still, prevailed. And you cannot think, of what
wonderful use the Genie's gift was to him then. Once turned in a right
direction and towards worthy objects, he found it like a sort of
friend at his right hand, helping him forward in some of the most
interesting pursuits of life. Ah! all the energy he had once bestowed
on imitating lisps and stuttering, was now engaged in catching the
sounds of foreign tongues, and thus taking one step towards the
citizenship of the world. And instead of wasting time in gazing at the
singing master's face, that he might ape its unnatural distortions--it
was now the sweet tones of skilful harmony to which he bent his
attention, and which he strove, and not in vain, to reproduce.
The portfolio which he brought home to his Mother at the end of
another half-year, was crowded with laborious and careful copies from
the best models of beauty and grace. And not with those only, for many
a face could be found on its pages in which the Mother recognized some
of her son's old companions. Portraits, not of the mere formation of
mouths and noses, which in so many cases, viewed merely as forms, are
defective and unattractive, but portraits of the same faces, upon
which the character of the inward mind and heart was so stamped that
it threw the mere shape of the features far into the background.
Thus with the pursuit of his favourite art, Joachim combined "that
most excellent gift of charity;" for it was now his pride and pleasure
to make the charm of expression from "the good points" his old
friend had talked about, triumph over any physical defects. The very
spirit and soul of the best sort of portrait painting. And here, my
dear young readers, I would fain call your attention to the fact of
how one right habit produces another. The more Joachim laboured over
seizing the good expression of the faces he drew from, the more he was
led to seek after and find out the good points themselves whence the
expression arose; and thus at last it became a Habit with him to try
and discover every thing that was excellent and commendable in the
characters of those he met; a very different plan from that pursued by
many of us, who in our intercourse with each other, are but too apt to
fasten with eagle-eye accuracy on failings and faults. Which is a very
grave error, and a very misleading one, for if it does nothing else,
it deprives us of all the good we should get by a daily habit of
contemplating what is worthy our regard and remembrance. And so
strongly did Joachim's mother feel this, and so earnestly did she wish
her son to understand that a power which seems bestowed for worldly
ends, may be turned to spiritual advantage also, that when his
birthday came round she presented to him among other gifts, a little
book, called "The Imitation of Jesus Christ." It was the work of an
old fellow called Thomas à Kempis, and though more practical books of
piety have since been written, the idea contained in the title
suggests a great lesson, and held up before Joachim's eyes, Him whom
one of our own divines has since called "The Great Exemplar."
This part of our little hero's 'Lesson of Life,' we can all take to
ourselves, and go and do likewise. And so I hope his story may be
profitable, though we have not all of us a large Genie-gift of
Imitation as he had. With him the excess of this power took a very
natural turn, for though he possessed through its aid, considerable
facilities for music and the study of languages also, the course of
events led him irresistibly to what is usually called "the fine arts."
And if the old dream of the royal chariot and the twelve jet black
horses was never realized to him, a higher happiness by far was his,
when some years after, he and his Mother stood in the council house of
his native town; she looking up with affectionate pride while he
showed her a portrait of the good young King which had a few hours
before been hung up upon its walls. It was the work of Joachim
DARKNESS AND LIGHT.
The darkness and the light to Thee are both alike.
Far away to the west, on the borders of the Sea, there lived a lady
and gentleman in a beautiful old house built something like a castle.
They had several children, nice little boys and girls, who were far
fonder of their Sea Castle, as they called it, than of a very pleasant
house which they had in a great town at some distance off. Still they
used to go and be very merry in the Town House in the winter time when
the hail and snow fell, and the winds blew so cold that nobody could
bear to walk out by the wild sea shore.
But in summer weather the case was quite altered. Indeed, as soon as
ever the sun began to get a little power, and to warm the panes of
glass in the nursery windows of the Town House, there was a hue and
cry among all the children to be off to their Sea Castle home, and
many a time had Papa and Mamma to send them angrily out of the room,
because they would do nothing but beg to "set off directly." They were
always "sure that the weather was getting quite hot," and "it must
be summer, for they heard the sparrows chirping every morning the
first thing," and they "thought they had seen a swallow," and "the
windows got so warm with the sunshine, Nurse declared they were enough
to burn one's fingers:" and so the poor little things teazed
themselves and everybody else, every year, in their hurry to get back
to their western home. But I dare say you have heard the old proverb,
"One swallow does not make a summer;" and so it was proved very often
to our friends. For the Spring season is so changeable, there are
often some soft mild days, and then a cruel frost comes again, and
perhaps snow as well; and people who have boasted about fine weather
and put off their winter clothes, look very foolish.
Still Time passes on; and when May was half over, the Town House used
to echo with shouts of noisy delight, and boxes were banged down in
the passages, and there was a great calling out for cords, and much
scolding about broken keys and padlocks, and the poor Carpenter who
came to mend the trunks and find new keys to old locks, was at his
wits' end and his patience' end too.
But at last the time came when all this bustle was succeeded by
silence in the Town House, for carriages had rolled away with the
happy party, and nobody was left behind but two or three women
servants to clean out the deserted rooms.
And now then, my little readers, who are, I hope, wondering what is
coming next, you must fancy to yourselves the old Sea Castle Home. It
had two large turrets; and winding staircases led from the passages
and kitchens underneath the sitting rooms, up to the top of the
turrets, and so out upon the leads of the house, from which there was
the most beautiful view of the Ocean you ever saw; and, as the top of
the house was battlemented, like the top of your church tower, people
could walk about quite safely and comfortably, without any fear of
falling over. Then, though it is a very unusual thing near the Sea,
there were delightful gardens at the place, and a few very fine old
elm trees near the house, in which a party of rooks built their nests
every year; and the children had gardens of their own, in which they
could dig up their flowers to see if the roots were growing, to their
heart's content, and perform other equally ingenious feats, such as
watering a plant two or three times a day, or after a shower of rain,
and then wondering that, with such tender care, the poor thing should
rot away and die.
But I almost think the children liked the sands on the shore as well
as the gardens, though they loved both. Not that there was any
amusement astir by the water side there, as you have seen in other
places where there are boats and fishermen and nets, and great coils
of ropes, and an endless variety of entertaining sights connected with
the seafaring business going on. Nay, in some places where there is
not a very good shore for landing, it is an amusement of itself to see
each boat or fishing yawl come in. There is such a contrast between
the dark tarred wood and the white surf that dashes up all round it;
and the fishermen are so clever in watching the favourable moment for
a wave to carry them over their difficulties; that I think this is one
of the prettiest sights one can see. But no such thing was ever seen
on the shore by the old Sea Castle, for there was no fishing there.
People thought the sea was too rough and the landing too difficult,
and so no fishing village had ever been built, and no boats ever
attempted to come within many miles of the place.
Nobody cared to ask further, or try to account for the wildness of the
sea on that coast; but I can tell you all about it, although it must
be in a sort of half whisper--The place was on the borders of Fairy
Land! that is to say, many many unknown numbers of miles out at sea,
right opposite to the Castle, there was a Fairy Island, and it was the
Fairies who kept the sea so rough all round them, for fear some
adventurous sailor should approach the island, or get near enough to
fish up some of the pearls and precious stones they kept in a crystal
palace underneath the water.
So now you know the reason why the sea was so rough, and there was no
fishing going on at the Sea Castle Home.
If you want to know whether any body ever saw the Fairy Island, I must
say, yes; but very seldom. And never but in the evening when the sun
was setting, and that under particular circumstances--namely, when he
went down into a dark red bank of clouds, or when there was a lurid
crimson hue over the sky just above the horizon. Then occasionally you
might see the dim hazy outline as of a beautiful mountainous island
against the clouds, or the deep-coloured sky. There is an island
sometimes seen from our western coast, under similar circumstances,
but which you strain your eyes in vain to discern by the brighter
light of day.[6]
Isle of Man from Blackpool.
It is a very ticklish thing to live on the borders of Fairy Land; for
though you cannot get to the Fairies, they can get to you, and it is
not altogether a pleasant thing to have your private affairs overseen
and interfered with by such beings as they are, though sometimes it
may be most useful and agreeable. Besides which, there was a
Fairy-secret connected with the family that lived at the Sea Castle.
An Ancestress of the present Mistress had been a Fairy herself, and
though she had accommodated herself to mortal manners, and lived with
her husband quite quietly as well as happily, and so her origin had
been in a great measure forgotten, it was not unknown to her
descendant, the Lady Madeline, who now lived in the place. And, in
fact, soon after Lady Madeline first came there, a Fairy named Eudora
had appeared to her, declaring herself to be a sort of distant cousin,
and offering and promising friendship and assistance, whenever asked
or even wished for. In return, she only begged to be allowed to visit,
and ramble at will about the old place which she had known for so many
many long years, and had once had the unlimited run of; and she
protested with tears that the family should never in any way be
disturbed by her. Lady Madeline could not well refuse the request, but
I cannot say she gave her fairy acquaintance any encouragement; and so
poor Eudora never showed herself to them again. And Madeline never
thought much about her, except now and then accidentally, when, if
they were walking on the sands, some extraordinarily rare and
beautiful shells would be thrown ashore by a wave at the children's
feet, as if tossed up especially for their amusement. And it was only
in some such kind little way as this they were ever reminded of the
Fairy's existence.
Lady Madeline's eldest son, Roderick, always seemed most favoured by
the Fairy in the pretty things she sent ashore, and certainly he was a
very nice boy, and a very good one on the whole--cheerful and honest
as the daylight, and very intelligent; but I cannot tell you, dear
readers, that he had no faults, for that was not at all likely, and
you would not believe it if I said so, even although he is to be the
Hero of my tale.
Now I do not want to make you laugh at him, but the story requires
that I should reveal to you one of his weak points. Well then,
although he was six years old, he was afraid of being alone in the
dark! Sometimes when he was in the large dining room with his Father
and Mother at dinner time, she would perhaps ask him to fetch
something for her from the drawing room which was close by; but, do
you know, if there were no candles in the room, he would look very
silly and refuse to go, even though there were a fire sufficient to
see by. He was too honest to make any false excuses, so he used just
to say that the room was so dark he could not go!
Poor Madeline was very sorry, for she wanted her little boy to be
brave, but somehow or other he had got very silly about his fears of
being in the dark, and she could not succeed in curing him of his
folly.
"My dear Roderick," she would say sometimes, "if I send in some
candles, will you go into the drawing room?"
"O yes, Mamma."
"Then do you really mean to say you think the Candles take care of
you?"
"No, Mamma."
"Then why won't you go into the room without; you know there is a
fire?
"Because it is so dark, Mamma."
Here was a difficulty indeed; for you see he would come back to the
old point, and would not listen to reason.
One day some conversation of this sort having passed between them,
Madeline, as she was wont to do, asked him if God could not take care
of him by night as well as by day; in the dark as well as in light,
for "the darkness and light are both alike to him."
"Oh yes," cried poor Roderick, with great animation, "and I can tell
you a story about that. There was, once upon a time, a little Boy and
a Nurse who went out walking, and they walked so long they got
benighted in a very dark wood, and because it was so dark the Nurse
screamed and was very much frightened; and the little boy said,
'Nurse, why are you frightened? Don't be frightened; I am not
frightened. God can take care of us in the dark as well as in the
light,'"
"Oh Roderick! what a pretty story," cried his Mamma.
And so thought Roderick; for his eye glistened and his cheek flushed
as he came to the conclusion.
And here, dear readers, was the worst difficulty of all; for though
Roderick's reason was quite convinced that God could take care of him
in the dark, he still could not bear to be in the dark without the
help of candles besides, though he quite knew they could not take care
of him at all. So you see by this that Reason, though it may convince
a person he is wrong, cannot put him right. There wants some other
help for that. And here let me just stop a moment to beg you to beware
of bad habits; for you see they become at last more powerful than
reason itself.
I do not know how Roderick first got into his foolish habit, and it
does not much matter. I know he at one time had a fancy there was
something unpleasant about the pipes that carried the water about the
house, and he would not for a long time go by the pipes alone. Now,
how you laugh! well, but he got out of that nonsense; and I hope to be
able to tell you that he got out of the other too: but at the time I
speak of, he made his Mamma full of sorrow for his want of sense and
courage.
It must be admitted that there were one or two excuses to be made for
the child. There was a great contrast between the Town House and the
Sea Castle. The Town House was full of lights. All the sitting rooms
were generally lighted, for a great deal of company came there, and
there were always lights along the passages; and the nursery windows
looked into a square, and the square was lighted up by lamps every
night; and it was one of Roderick's greatest pleasures to watch the
lamplighter running quickly up the tall ladder to the lamps to light
them, and then popping down again equally hurriedly, and running along
(ladder and all) to the next lamp post, and so on, till the square was
brilliant all round; and very often, as Roderick lay in his little bed
watching the glimmering thrown by these pretty lamps on the nursery
wall, he used to think and think of his friend the nimble lamplighter,
till he dropped fast asleep. You see, therefore, he had very little to
try his courage in the Town House, and there was seldom or never any
fuss about his fears till the move to the Sea Castle took place; and
then there were no more lamps and lamplighters, and no more
comfortable glimmerings from his bright pets the lamps after he went
to bed; and he used to get silly directly, and declare that he saw
bears whenever he shut his eyes; and he seemed to expect to find lions
and tigers under the sofas, by the fuss he made when he was asked to
go into the rooms. Certainly there was a grand old fashioned lamp in
the hall of the Sea Castle; but the hall itself was so big, and went
up so high, that the light in one part only seemed to make the shadow
and darkness of the other part look blacker still; so that I must
confess there was something gloomy about the house. Then, too, there
were those two turrets with the winding staircases, and as Roderick
had never dared to do any thing more than peep in at the low entrance
doors below, where he saw nothing but four or five steps going up into
complete blackness, he had got a sort of notion there must be
something horrid about them.
Well; it was soon after this little boy's sixth birthday, that the
family arrived at the Sea-Castle, and it so happened, that, on the day
after their arrival, there was some very stormy and dismal weather.
The wind howled very loudly, and there was a good deal of rain; and
Lady Madeline wished they had waited a week or two longer. The sky was
so charged and heavy, too, that they found the house very dark, even
by day-light; and Roderick, who was a little tired with his journey
the day before, began to fancy all kinds of nonsense; talked more
about seeing bears than ever; and finally cried tremendously at going
to bed, declaring he was sure there was a tiger in the coal-pan. Now
you know, my dears, this was a bit of great nonsense; for Roderick
knew quite well that there are no wild beasts in England but what are
kept in very strong cages; and that the men who take wild-beast shows
round the country can by no means afford to let their tigers sleep in
nursery coal-pans!
Poor Madeline never liked to see any of her children go to bed in
tears. And Roderick was so gay and merry generally, it seemed quite
unnatural in him; but though at last he left off crying, she could not
persuade him to be cheerful, and smile; for he declared that as soon
as ever she took her candle away, he could not help seeing those
unlucky bears. Was there ever any thing so silly before! She reasoned
with him, but to no purpose. He always said he quite believed in God's
presence, and His being able to take care of him; but, as I said
before, his bad habit had got the better of his good sense, and he
finished off every thing that could be said, by seeing bears, and
dreading a tiger in the coal-pan.
"What are we to do with that child?" cried Madeline to her husband, as
they were going to bed. "He is beginning as foolishly as ever this
year, in spite of being a year older. I really shall at last be
inclined to think that in spite of all her fair promises of friendship
and assistance, and of never injuring the family, the Fairy Eudora
must secretly frighten the child in some way we don't know of."
"No such thing, my dear Madeline; I cannot for a moment believe it;"
said her husband. "I have a better opinion of your relations, the
Fairies, than you have yourself. I am sure Eudora would not break her
word for the world; and there is no mystery about Roderick's folly. He
is full of fancies of all sorts,--some pretty, and some silly ones;
and we must do every thing we can to cure him of the silly ones. It
certainly is a very hard matter to accomplish, for I perceive he
admits the truth of every thing you say, and yet is as silly as ever
at the end. I heartily wish the Fairy Eudora would interfere to cure
him of his nonsense!"
"And so do I, if she could, and would," sighed Madeline; "but she has
quite deserted us. Besides, if she were to come, I don't see how she
could possibly do any good. Fairies cannot change little boys' hearts;
and I must confess I never yet got any good myself from having a Fairy
ancestress, and I have no confidence in them.--Still," pursued the
good lady, as she laid her head on her pillow, "I am not able, it
appears, to convince Roderick myself; and therefore I feel, with you,
that I wish the Fairy would come and try."
"I fear it is in vain to say so now, Madeline. We have wished the poor
creature out of the way so often for the last ten years, that it is
not very likely a single wish the other way will bring her to us."
"No, indeed," murmured the Fairy Eudora, who at that moment was
standing on the shore of the Fairy Island; "you are a pretty pair, you
two, to think of such a thing! I begged to be allowed to come about
the place years ago, and you didn't refuse; but you always kept me
away by wishing I mightn't come; and now, because you are puzzled to
know what to do with your silly child, you want me with you for the
first time these ten years! Oh, you selfish people, don't fancy I'll
come near you!" And the justly angry Fairy stamped her foot in
indignation, and retired into private apartments in the palace.
Do not be surprised at what you have just heard, my dear children; for
though you may have never thought about the power and importance of
wishes, there is, I assure you, a great deal of both one and the
other belonging to them. Some people talk, indeed, of "mere wishes,"
as if they were trifles light as air; but it is not so. To prove this,
first think what importance is attached to them in the Scriptures.
Wishes are a sort of porch or doorway to actions. In the Tenth
Commandment we are forbidden to wish for what belongs to our
neighbour;--for who is so likely to break the Eighth Commandment, and
steal, as the man who breaks the Tenth, and wishes for any thing that
is not his?
And so, all the evil in the world begins by wishing something wrong;
and if you can cure yourself of wishing wrongly, you will very seldom
do wrong.
Now you see, I am sure, how important wishes are for evil; but they
are equally strong for good. For, if you wish well to any one, you
have opened the first door to doing him a kindness. And if you
heartily wish to be good, you have opened the first gate on the road
of becoming so. Of course, wishes will not do every thing; but they do
a great deal.
And there is another thing. They never fall to the ground unnoticed.
Though you and I cannot look into each other's hearts, or hear the
wishes breathed there, there is One who hears them all. Good wishes,
my dear children, all ascend upwards to the throne of Grace, like
sweet perfume. They are all accepted and remembered; and, I fear I
must add, that bad wishes go up too, and are noted in His book who
takes account of all we do.
Be sure, therefore, that you encourage your hearts in a habit of good,
and kind, and charitable wishes; and if ever the bad ones come into
your head, pray against them, and drive them away.
Meanwhile do not be surprized that in Fairy tales, Fairies are
supposed to hear wishes concerning themselves. And so Eudora heard
those about her coming and curing the child of his folly; and as I
have told you, she was very indignant at the selfishness of both Lady
Madeline and her husband.
A few days after the family had taken up their residence in the Sea
Castle, the weather began to improve; and, though the wind lasted, the
sun came out; and all the children and the nurses went walking on the
sands. As it was the first time that year, you may guess what shouting
and delight there was; how the little spades dug away at holes for the
sea-water to come up in, and how the children caught at the sea-weeds
that were scattered on the lands to carry home to their Mamma; how
they picked up shells, and gambolled about in all directions,
declaring that they had never known the Sea Castle Home so delightful
before. By degrees they had strayed to a considerable distance along
the sands, with the nurses, when, alas! the latter perceived that a
storm was coming on, and it caught them long before they reached home.
A strong wind blew off the sea, and they had difficulty in keeping
their feet, and at last two or three of the children were almost
hidden in a cloud of sand, which a violent gust suddenly drove against
them. All the little party cried lustily, because the sand had blown
into their eyes, and made them smart, and sad work there was in
getting them home again. But they reached home at last, dripping with
wet from hailstones, and their eyes all red and disfigured by the sand
and wind. None, however, were so bad as those I have mentioned, who
had been so covered over by the sand that it had even got down their
necks, and made them uncomfortable all over. Among these was Roderick,
who cried a great deal more than he ought to have done, as the nurses
thought, and did not stop and declare himself comfortable as the rest
did, after the sand had been washed out of his eyes with rose water.
In fact he kept crying more or less all the afternoon, saying his eyes
hurt him so, and at last he could get no relief but by holding them
shut.
Now it is just possible you may have heard of a complaint of the eyes
called Ophthalmia, which comes on sometimes in very hot countries,
India for instance; and sometimes in travelling across the deserts of
Arabia, where the sand gets into the eyes, and irritates them very
much; it can very often be cured, but not always, and when it cannot,
it ends in blindness. Lady Madeline knew all about the complaint; and,
therefore, you will not be surprised to hear that when she found her
little boy's eyes did not get better, and that he persisted in keeping
them shut, because they then became easy, she thought it right to send
to some miles' distance for a doctor, who accordingly arrived at the
Sea Castle before nightfall. But when he came he shook his head very
much, for he could not understand what was the matter; and when he
persuaded Roderick to lift up his eyelids, to let him see his eyes, he
could perceive nothing amiss but a little redness, which the wind and
sand quite accounted for. Still the child was uneasy, and would keep
his eyes shut; so the Doctor thought he must try something, and he
used some lotions common in such cases; but, as they did no good, the
kind old gentleman, at Madeline's request, consented to sit by the
little boy's bedside at night; when, all at once, as he was carefully
dabbing his eyes with rosewater, he perceived that the child was fast
asleep.
The Doctor was delighted, and went to his mother, who was then with
her husband, and said that as Roderick had gone to sleep so nicely, he
had no doubt that his eyes would be well when he awoke in the morning,
and so he took his leave, for he had other patients to visit.
It was then between twelve and one o'clock, and Lady Madeline, much
comforted in heart, went to bed. At an early hour next morning,
however, she went to Roderick's bedside, and perceived he was just
waking.
To the question of "How are you, my darling?" his cheerful joyous
voice made answer, "Oh, quite well, Mamma, and I've such a funny dream
to tell you, and my eyes don't hurt me a bit, not a bit! but I'm
afraid to open them for fear they should. I can tell you something so
funny the Doctor said last night, Mamma." "Never mind about the
doctor, you rogue," cried Madeline, "I see you are all right, only
just open your dear old eyes, that I may tell Papa I have seen them
when I go back to dress."
"Then I will, Mamma, to please you!" and up sat the pretty child in
his bed, and opened wide his blue eyes. There was no redness--it was
all gone--but
"Mamma! where are you," cried Roderick, "I have opened my eyes, and
they don't hurt--but it is quite dark: isn't the night over?..."
Oh, my dear readers! there was a stream of sunshine on the lovely face
and bright hair of little Roderick as he spoke, and the poor blue eyes
were turned up to his mother, looking vainly for her face. You cannot
wonder if I add that she sank down fainting on the bed; and when
Roderick's scream of terror brought the nurses to them, she was
carried away insensible from the room.
Her darling was utterly blind.
And now imagine to yourselves how the afflicted parents sent for the
best doctors the country afforded, and how one thing after another was
tried--but, alas! every thing in vain, for the medical men were all
quite puzzled. Still some people gave them hopes, and in spite of many
disappointments, they went on trying to hope for several months. At
last they settled to leave the sea castle and go to the great town
sooner than usual, thinking some of the doctors there might be
cleverer than the country ones. But they had no better success.
Perhaps now you would like to know how Roderick behaved. When his
Mamma fell on his bed, at first he thought she was dead, and it was
with the greatest difficulty he could be made to believe any thing
else, and he cried, and cried, and was very sad till his Mamma was
well enough for him to be taken to her, and then do you know, poor
fellow, he was so much pleased to hear her speak, and be kissed by
her, that he still had no time to think about himself. Only he begged
to sit close to her, and have hold either of her hand or gown, and
make her say something to him every now and then. And so it was that
the fright and shock he had had about thinking she was dead, had made
so strong an impression on him that for several days the making
himself sure she was alive was a constant occupation and interest; and
so much did he think about it that it was considered best for his
little bed to be brought into the room where his Mamma slept, and put
near hers, so that he could talk to her when he awoke and got
frightened about her again. And thus passed many days in which every
body thought a great deal more about his eyes than he did himself.
Besides from the cheerful things they said to him he quite expected to
be better some day; and so weeks and months passed, and by the time
the hope of recovering his sight began to fade away, and nobody any
longer dared to say they expected it, he was beginning to get used to
his condition, and to find out amusements in new ways. Thus mercifully
does a kind Providence temper people's minds to the afflictions He
sends. They are often more dreadful to think of than to bear; for God
can give patience and cheerfulness and comfort to those that do not
grumble and repine.
Madeline only exacted one promise from her husband, namely, that he
would not allow the doctors to use any very severe and violent
measures with her little boy, and this being settled, she struggled to
bear the trouble with resignation. After the first alternations of
hopes and fears were over, the Mother's mind took a new turn. "It is
our chief duty now," she said, "to make our child's life as happy as
it is possible to be with blindness, and therefore," added she to the
elder children, "we must try our best to teach him to do all the nice
things he can without seeing." That day she asked him to come and hold
worsted for her to wind, and he was quite delighted to find that with
some blunders, and once or twice slipping it off his fingers, he could
manage it very well. Then the children undertook to teach him how to
play at ball, and you cannot think how clever he became. At first
certainly they had always to pick up his ball for him when it fell,
and who was not glad to do it for poor brother Roderick? but by
degrees he could judge by the sound in what direction it had tumbled,
and he would often succeed in finding it before any one could come up
to it. Then there was laughing and scrambling without end. Reading
aloud to him was the easiest thing of all, but the little folks were
not satisfied with that alone. They made a sort of pet of the blind
brother, and were as proud of teaching him to do any thing fresh, as
you would be of teaching your dog to sit up and shake hands, or
perform any wonderful feat. It was their constant amusement; and by
degrees Roderick could play at all sorts of games with them, ay, and
run after them, and catch them too as well as you could do, for he
soon got to remember how the furniture in the great hall and all the
rooms stood, and he could run about without hurting himself in a
wonderful manner. And when it was evening and grew dark, he got on
better than they did, for, if they couldn't see, they were clumsy,
whereas he was learning to do without seeing at all.
Such of my readers as have seen one of those excellent institutions
called "blind schools," will not wonder at any thing I have said, but
on the contrary, will know that I have not told half or a quarter of
what may be done to teach blind children a variety of employments. At
those schools you may see children making beautiful baskets of
various-coloured strips of osier arranged in patterns; and they never
forget on which side of them the different colours are laid, and this
work they can go on with quite fast, even while you stand talking to
them--and they learn to do many many other nice things also besides
basket making.
Of late years too they have begun to read in books made on purpose for
them, with the letters raised above the rest of the paper, so that
they can feel the shapes with their fingers. Is not this wonderful?
And they can be taught all these things much more easily than you
would imagine, for it is really true that when one of the senses has
been taken away, the others by having all the exercise thrown upon
them, become so sharp and acute, they do twice their usual work, if I
may so express it. This is a merciful dispensation of Providence,
which renders the loss of the one that is gone much less hard to bear.
And does it not teach us also, what a valuable thing constant practice
is? Neither you nor I can feel or hear half so clearly as blind people
can, who practise feeling and hearing on so many occasions where we
save ourselves the trouble, by using sight instead.
To return to Roderick. You perhaps expected to hear that he fretted
and petted very much after he was first blind, but really it was not
so; and though occasionally he may have grumbled a little, it was only
when he was slightly peevish, as children will sometimes be, and I
believe he would have found something to grumble about then, even if
he had seen as well as you do.
Besides, as I said before, the knowledge of his misfortune came upon
him by degrees; and after he had got used to it, he did not think much
about it. When the family moved to the great town, Roderick had as it
were to begin his blind lessons over again, for he had to learn to
remember all about the rooms and the furniture there; but with a kind
little brother or sister always at hand to help him he soon became
expert in the town house too, and could run up and down the long
flights of stairs with the nimblest of them. I believe the only
melancholy wish he ever uttered was heard on the first day he reached
the town house. When his Mamma came to see him in the nursery that
evening, she found him kneeling in a chair against one of the
windows--and on going up to him he threw his arms round her neck and
said, "Oh, Mamma, if I could but see the lamplighters!" Do not laugh,
dear readers, if I add that the tears trickled over his cheeks as he
spoke. His mother was much distressed, as she always was when she saw
him thinking of his affliction, but she sat down and said, "Never
mind, dear Roderick, I will tell you all they do to-night." And so she
did, and she made her account so droll, of how the lamplighter ran,
and how he seized his ladder in such a hurry, and all the whole
business, that by the time she got to the end, and said, "and now he
has come to the last lamp-post,--ah, he's up before I can tell you!
and pop! the lamp is lit, and down he runs, and off with his ladder to
the next street--and now the lamps are shining bright all round the
square, and I must go to dinner,"--Roderick was clapping his hands and
laughing as merrily as ever, and he got down from the chair quite
satisfied. Still for a few weeks he used always to get one of the
children to tell him of the lamps lighting, and this was the only sad
little fancy the poor child ever indulged in.
The great town gave him various new amusements. His Parents used every
now and then to take him to some fine conservatory, where flowers are
shown even in winter, and where he could smell various new and rare
ones, and be told all about their beautiful colours. Then sometimes in
the parks and gardens there was a band playing, which was a great
delight. And besides that, they took him occasionally to morning
concerts for an hour or so; for though it is not usual to take
children to those places, he was deprived of so many enjoyments, they
let him have all they could: and especially musical ones, for it is a
very common thing for blind people to become very fond of music, and
Roderick was so, and among other employments learnt to play. I cannot,
however, I am sorry to say, add that the great doctors in the town
were able to do him any good, though they tried very much, and some of
them were so much charmed and interested by his cheerful manner and
sweet disposition, that they got quite fond of him, and would often
have him come and see them, and play with their children, who were
instructed to amuse him in every possible way, and as children are
naturally kindhearted, this was generally a pleasant task, and many of
them quite looked forward to the visits of the little blind boy.
And so passed on a long and rather severe winter, and presently
Roderick's birthday came round, and there was great wondering as to
what Mamma could do to keep it. And when the time came it turned out
that she had got a band of musicians to come and play--and the
children danced, and Roderick among them, for some sister was always
ready to take him under her especial charge. And then some older
children acted a little play, which he could hear and understand, and
his Mamma described to him who came in and went out, and in this
manner he enjoyed it nearly as much as the others.
Well, the spring-time came once more, and with it the season for
returning to the old Sea Castle, and the children went through their
usual round of impatience, and I cannot say that Roderick at all
forbore, for his Papa had promised to teach him to climb a ladder like
the lamplighter when he got back, and he was by that means to go up
one of the very old elm trees, and get on to a great branch there was,
which was curled into a sort of easy chair, and there he was to sit
and play at being judge, and hold trials, and I know not what. There
were besides so many schemes for his instruction and amusement, and
among other things, there was to be a band established in the
neighbouring village, which should come and play to them in the old
Sea Castle--that the child was more wild with hurry and impatience
than ever, and said more absurd things than the rest, for he used
every day to declare the flies were becoming so numerous and
troublesome he was plagued out of his life by their walking over his
face and nose! But as none of his brothers and sisters ever saw the
flies, we are obliged to conclude the tickling he talked of was only
an effect of his excited imagination.
At last, however, they went, and in compliment to Roderick's wishes it
was a week or two sooner than usual. The return to the Sea Castle home
rather oppressed poor Lady Madeline's spirits. The doctors in the
great town had failed--it was now clear that nothing could be done,
and in spite of all her sincere endeavours to be resigned, she could
not help feeling this coming back to the original scene of her
misfortune very much. One day--it was the anniversary of the day on
which her poor child became blind, the Lady Madeline was working in
her sitting-room that faced the Sea,--Mothers' memories are very acute
about anniversaries, and days, and even hours marked by particular
events. They may not talk much about them perhaps, but they recollect
times and circumstances connected with their children very keenly, and
therefore it is not surprizing that on this day the poor lady was
sitting in her room working, or trying to work, but thinking of
nothing in the world but of that day year and her blind child. It was
a beautiful evening, and the window was thrown wide open, and the
fresh but soft breeze from the Sea blew pleasantly on her face as she
sat at her work-table by the casement--but lovely as the scene outside
was, she seldom lifted up her eyes to look at it. She had been all her
life a great admirer of beautiful scenes, and of all the varieties the
changes of day and night produce--but now the sight of any thing
particularly lovely brought so painfully before her mind the fact that
her child's eyes were closed to all these things, that she often
forbore to look again, and so spared herself a repetition of the pang.
Madeline's eyes therefore remained upon her work, or on her knee when
she ceased working,--for ever and anon there was a burst of noise and
merriment about the old house, which startled her from her painful
thoughts. It was, however, the happy voices of her children, and again
and again she sank into her melancholy mood, and so continued till the
red hue of a very red sunset burst as it were suddenly into the room,
and lighted up the portrait of Roderick, which hung over the
mantel-piece. Involuntarily Madeline's eyes glanced from the lovely
countenance of her then bright-eyed boy, thus illuminated, to the sun
beyond the Sea. She was too late, however. He had just descended
behind the waves in a perfect flood of crimson glory, but as she
gazed, (for she could not withdraw-her eyes,) a haze--yes, the softest
and most etherial cloud-like haze, showing the outline of a beautiful
mountainous island, rose in the far off distance, just on the verge of
the horizon. It was the Fairy Island. It recalled to the mother's
remembrance the existence of her Fairy cousin once more. "Cruel, cruel
Eudora," she exclaimed, "you offered me friendship and assistance, and
in the hour of trouble and affliction you have never been near to help
or even to comfort me."
And Madeline, in the bitterness of her heart, closed the window
hastily and angrily, and sat down. Soon, however, the noises she had
several times heard of the children playing, became louder and louder,
and the whole party burst at last into the room. "Mamma, Mamma," they
cried, scarcely able to speak, "guess where Roderick has been." "I
cannot." "Oh, but do, dear Mamma!" cried a little thing with fairy
curls, "do guess." "I cannot." "I'll tell Mamma," cried a stout sturdy
fellow, a little older; "Mamma! he's been up the winding staircase of
one turret, and all along the leads and down the winding staircase of
the other turret, and he has done it three times, and he has seen to
do it better than I can."
Here there was a burst of laughter and a violent clapping of hands at
the little fellow's Irish account.
"But why don't you do it as well?" asked an elder girl, "you that are
going to be a soldier too!"
"Yes; I know I'm going to be a soldier; and I'll try and do it as well
as Roderick;" and off ran the eager child, followed by the rest of the
party, all but Roderick. He lingered behind, and edging his way easily
and quietly as usual to his Mother, having asked her where she was, he
sat down on a footstool at her feet. The slight answer she had
occasion to make, revealed by its tone, to the now acute blind child,
that his Mother's mood was serious, and therefore he did not talk and
laugh of what he had accomplished, as he otherwise might have done.
There was a silence of some minutes: at last, "Mamma," said Roderick
gravely, "a light has broken in upon me to-day."
Lady Madeline started, and with difficulty suppressed a groan.
Roderick felt the start: "Oh Mamma, Mamma," cried he more cheerfully,
"you must not do that! I wasn't thinking about earthly light in the
least, but of a light which I know, when you come to hear of it, you
will say is a great deal better."
"Indeed! dear Roderick," said Lady Madeline, trying to seem
interested.
"Yes indeed. Mamma. Why, do you remember, (I had never thought
about it till it came into my head to-day;) but do you remember the
silly time when I wouldn't fetch you any thing from the drawing room,
unless there were candles in the room?"
"I recollect something about it," said his Mother.
"Oh, I'm so glad you do; because now you can laugh with me over the
nonsense I used to talk and feel then: I remember I used to tell you I
saw Bears when I shut my eyes, and wouldn't go by the pipes in the
passage, and more such foolish stuff! How odd it seems that I should
never have thought about this before, but I never did, and it never
came into my head distinctly till to-day." And here Roderick fell into
a kind of dream for a few minutes, but he soon began again. "You know
what I have done to-day, Mamma. They told you quite right; but they
forgot to tell you I have been practising walking across the leads for
two or three days, that I might be able to go the great round to-day
on purpose to tell you of it; because I thought you would be so much
pleased to know I could go alone all over the house on the day year
when I was first blind. So now, Mamma, if ever, when I am grown up to
be a man, an enemy comes and attacks the old Sea Castle, I shall be
able to run about and give the alarm, for you know I could hear them,
if I could do nothing else."
There was another pause, for Madeline could not speak: the often
restrained tears for her son's misfortune had this day burst forth,
and could not be kept back; but Roderick did not know, and went on.
"Certainly those old foolish fears were very wrong, Mamma. And I can't
think how it was, for you used to remind me always that God could take
care of us by night as well as by day, in darkness as well as in
light; and still somehow, though I knew it was true, I didn't believe
it,--at least, not so as not to be afraid in the dark: how very wrong
it was! Still I had quite forgotten all about it till this evening.
But, as I was going the last of the three rounds, I sat down on the
leads for a few minutes to enjoy the air. The sun was just setting, I
am sure, for it felt so fresh and cool; and it was, as I sat there,
that it came into my head how strange it was that, since the day I was
first blind, I had never thought any more about being afraid in the
dark! or by night any more than by day! Indeed it has been quite a
play to me ever since to do different things, and find my way about in
all the rooms and all over the house, without seeing; and I have only
known night from day by getting up and going to bed. So that you see,
Mamma, being always in the dark, has quite cured me of being afraid of
it: and is not this a very good thing indeed?"
"Very," murmured Madeline.
"I knew you would say so! But that isn't all I have got to say. A
great deal more than that came into my head when I was out upon the
leads."
And Roderick nestled closer to his Mother, and laid his arms across
her lap.
"Something to comfort you still more, Mamma."
She could not speak.
"Mamma, you are crying! I feel your tears on my hand. Do not cry about
me."
"Go on, dear Roderick."
"Don't you think," continued the child, "that people who wont listen
to what is told them, and wont be cured of being foolish and wicked,
are very like the old Jews you told us about yesterday, who had God
among them, and Moses teaching them what God wished them to do, and
still were as disobedient as ever?"
"It is true, Roderick, we are all apt to resemble the Jews in their
journey through the wilderness."
"Yes, Mamma; and particularly people who can't trust in God, though
they know He is everywhere. The Jews knew He was in the cloud and the
pillar, and still were always afraid He couldn't take care of them.
And what came into my head was, that I used to be as bad as those old
Jews once; knowing that God was present everywhere to take care of me,
and still not feeling it so as really to believe it, and not be
afraid. But the blindness has quite cured me, and is it not very
likely that it came on purpose to do so, and to make me trust in God;
for I have done so more and more, dear Mamma, as I groped about this
year, for I have all along hoped He would take care of me, and keep me
from falling; and, therefore, I think the blindness has done me a
great deal of good, and I hope I shall never be like the naughty old
Jews again! This is what I had to say; and I hope you will be as glad
as I am."
"I will try, my darling," cried poor Madeline.
The tenderest love, the bitterest grief, mixed with earnest struggles
for resignation to the will of Heaven, contended in the Mother's
bosom, as she clasped her innocent child to her heart. He was almost
frightened. She lifted him on to her knees, and buried her face on his
shoulder. He put his young arms round her neck, and almost wondered
why she sobbed so bitterly; but he felt he must not speak.
There was a painful pause. Suddenly, however, a strange faint light
began to creep into the room, which had hitherto been gradually
darkening in the twilight. It was a mysterious gleam, like nothing
that is ever seen. It increased in strength and brilliancy, till at
length the whole place became illuminated.
Roderick's head was against his Mother's breast; and, besides, he
could not see.
She, however, suddenly started up; the light had become so powerful,
it had forced her from her grief. She sprung up in terror, and a faint
shriek burst from her lips.
"Mamma, what is the matter?" cried Roderick, holding her fast.
"Oh, the light--the light, my child! there is such a light!" answered
Madeline.
"Mother, you are not afraid of Light!" exclaimed the bewildered
Roderick.
"Oh, but this light! it is like no other;--it is awful!"
"Mother,--it is not the light of Fire, is it," cried poor Roderick,
now at last turning pale. "But even if it is, remember that I can help
you now; I can go everywhere,--all over, and fear nothing. I can go
and fetch my brothers and sisters, one by one! Oh, send me; send me,
Mamma! I shall be less afraid than any of you, for I cannot see the
horrid light that frightens you!"
As he finished, a gentle, prolonged "Hush!" resounded through the
room; like the soothing, quieting sound of lullaby to an infant. And
in the midst of the beaming light, the form of the long-forgotten
Fairy Eudora appeared before the eyes of the astonished Madeline.
"The Sea Castle is not on Fire, you dear, brave child," cried the
Fairy; "and your Mother has no cause for fear. I am a friend."
"Cousin!" cried the bewildered Madeline, "why are you here?" and a
terrible suspicion flashed through her mind: and she pointed to her
boy, and added, trembling with agony--
"Is that your doing?"
"What if I say it is, Cousin Madeline. There is a long story about
that, but we shall have time for it hereafter.--Dear little Cousin
Roderick," pursued the Fairy, seating herself, and drawing Roderick to
her. "You have been a good boy, and got light out of darkness. Mind
you hold it fast. You did not use the light well, though, when you had
it, Cousin Roderick."
"I know I didn't," was his answer.
"If you could live the light time over again, you would be wiser,
Roderick."
"I hope I should indeed," he murmured fervently; "but it is not likely
I shall ever see the light again."
"Little boys shouldn't say things are not likely, when they don't know
any thing about them," cried the Fairy gaily, to cheer them up.
"I dare say, if I were to ask you, you would tell me it was a bit of
sand that got into your eyes last year, that made you blind; but it
was no such thing, clever Master Roderick. Your naughty Cousin Eudora
had something to do with that; but, luckily, she can put her own work
straight again. Cousin Madeline, what do you think of my pretty
light?"
"Eudora, it is dreadful."
"Then shut your eyes, poor thing, we don't want to blind you. But
Roderick and I have not done talking yet. Come, little boy, lift up
your face towards me, and open those pretty eyes wide, that I may see
if I can't do them some good. Why, they are as blue as the water round
our island! There, now, they are looking at my face. Mind you tell me
if you think me pretty."
"Eudora!" exclaimed Madeline.
"Sit down, sit down, and shut your eyes, good woman. Now, Roderick,
wont even my Fairy light break through your darkness?"
"I think it will," sighed Roderick; "there is a white light all round
me, as if I had gone up into a bright white cloud. You frighten me,
Fairy! Take away the light, and put me back into the darkness again."
"Not so, my pretty Roderick; but I will soften it a little;" and she
waved her wand, and the brilliancy subsided.
"Fairy, I see you now," screamed Roderick, springing up, for he was
sitting at her feet; "and oh, how beautiful you are!"
"Roderick!" cried a voice from behind him. He turned; and Mother and
Son were locked in each other's arms.
Surely I need say no more about this? though perhaps nobody but a
Mother can quite know how happy and thankful Lady Madeline was. And as
to Roderick, he was delighted too! Not but what he had been very happy
and contented before; but sight was a new pleasure to him now; a sort
of treat, like a birthday or Christmas present, which puts every one
into high spirits. It was so charming to him, poor fellow, (for he was
very affectionate), to actually see his Mamma again; and this put
something else into his head, and off he ran out of the room.
"Eudora," Madeline began, "how am I to thank you! Can you ever forgive
my old unkindness?"
"Cousin Madeline," replied the Fairy, "I bear no malice to any one,
least of all to you, who come of a race I love, and of a family I
consider my own. No, no, good soul. I have never borne you ill-will,
though my kindness has been severe. Look! I know you love me now.
Love me always, Cousin Madeline, and let me ramble undisturbed about
your earthly home; but, mind! no more unkind wishes, however slight.
They come like evil winds to our Fairy island. You kept me away long
enough by those; and when you wished me with you, to get your child
out of his folly, I was very angry, and thought I wouldn't come; but
your, and your husband's wish was so strong and earnest, it haunted me
day and night; and I had no comfort till I had resolved to help you.
And here, Madeline, you have something to forgive me. My remedy has
been a harsh, a very harsh one for so slight a fault; but at first I
intended it to last only a few days. Afterwards, however, seeing how
it was acting upon him, and upon you all, for good, I let it work its
full effect: and I think it has been greatly blessed! Now, farewell!
Time is flying, and I must begone."
And thus the Fairy and Madeline walked to the window, which the latter
reopened, and there was the full moon sailing in the cloudless sky,
and lighting up the lovely, and, this evening, calm and unruffled sea.
The cousins embraced; and in a few minutes the Fairy had disappeared
in the distance. Madeline lingered awhile at the casement, thinking
tenderly of the gentle-hearted Fairy, and watching the horizon. At
last the outline of the Fairy's home appeared clear and bright against
the dark blue heaven, and then subsided gently by degrees. And
Madeline closed the window, grateful and happy, and went after her
boy. But she had not far to go; for he was coming along the passages
with all his brothers and sisters, wild with delight. And oh, how
Roderick chattered and talked about all their faces, and how he loved
to see the fat cheeks of one near his own age, and how some had grown,
and their noses improved, and what beautiful curls another had! In
short, if he had gone on long they would all have got quite conceited
and fancy, and fancied themselves a set of downright beauties. But you
see it was love that made poor Roderick admire them all so much;
and, above all, he was charmed when they smiled. Ah, how little do
brothers and sisters know how tender their recollections of each
others' faces would become, were a separation to take place among
them! Then all the sweet smiles and pretty looks would be recalled,
that in every day life are seen with such indifference. "Little
children, love one another," during the happy days when you live
together in health and comfort.
Can you guess, dear readers, what a joyous evening it was, that day at
the Sea Castle Home? How the poor Father rejoiced, and how the old
Hall was lighted up for the Servants, to share in the joy by a merry
dance; and how all the children danced too; and how a barrel of good
ale was tapped, for every one to drink to the health and happiness of
Master Roderick, and all the family. But you never can guess how
Roderick teased all his brothers and sisters that evening, by
constantly kissing them. In the midst of a country dance he would run
right across to the ladies, when he ought to be standing still and
polite, and kiss two or three of his sisters as they were waiting to
dance in their turn, and tell them how nice they looked! Or he would
actually run right away from his place, to his Papa and Mamma;--jump
on their knees, and hug them very hard, and then run back again,
perhaps, into the middle of the dance, and put every thing into
confusion. But the happiest scene of all was, when the Father and
Mother thanked God that night for the blessing that had returned to
their little boy.
And do not ask me, I beg, if he ever was afraid of being in the dark
again. No, dear Readers, his temporary misfortune had taught him the
best of all lessons;--A LIVING FAITH AND TRUST IN THE PROTECTING
OMNIPRESENCE OF GOD.
THE LOVE OF GOD.
PREAMBLE (FROM LIFE.)
Van Artevelde. These are but words.
Elena. My lord, they're full of meaning!
     Van Artevelde.
Grace had been said, and Mamma was busy carving for the large party of
youngsters who sat around the comfortable dinner-table, when a little
voice from among them called out,
"Mamma, do you think a giant could see a carraway seed?"
Now there was no sweet loaf on the table, nor even on the
sideboard--neither had there been any plum cake in the house for some
time--nor were there any carraway seeds in the biscuits just then.
--In short, there was nothing which could be supposed to have
suggested the idea of carraway seeds to the little boy who made the
enquiry. Still he did make it, and though he went on quietly with his
dinner, he expected to receive an answer.
Had the good Lady at the head of the table not been the mother of a
large family, she might possibly have dropt the carving knife and
fork, in sheer astonishment at the unaccountableness of the question,
but as it was, she had heard so many other odd ones before, that she
did not by outward sign demonstrate the amusement she felt at this,
but simply said,--"Perhaps he could"--for she knew that it was out
of her power to speak positively as to whether a Giant could see a
carraway seed or not.
Now dear little readers, what do you think about this very important
affair? Do you think a Giant could see a carraway seed or not?--"Oh
yes," you all cry,--"of course he could!"
Nay, my dears, there is no "of course" at all in the matter! Can any
of you, for example, see the creatures that float about and fight in a
drop of water from the Serpentine River? No, certainly not! except
through a microscope. Well, but why not?--you do not know. That I
can easily believe! But then you must never again say that "of
course" a Giant could see a carraway seed.
It is entirely a question of relative proportion: so now you feel
quite small, and admit your total ignorance, I hope. Yes! it all
depends upon whether the giant is as much bigger than the carraway
seed, as you are bigger than the curious little insects that float
about and fight in the drop of water from the Serpentine river--for if
he is, we may conclude from analogy that a giant could not see a
carraway seed except through a microscope. You see it is a sort of
rule of three sum, but as I cannot work it out, I tell you honestly
that neither do I know whether a giant could see so small an object or
not, and I advise you all to be as modest as I am myself, and never
speak positively on so difficult a point.
But enough of this! Turn we now to another point, about which I can
speak positively--namely, that in one sense the world is full of
Giants who cannot see Carraway seeds.
"It must be in the sense of Nonsense I should think then!" observes
somewhat scornfully the young lady who is reading this story
aloud--"as if we could believe in there being giants now!"
Very wittily remarked! my dear young lady, for your age.--I take you
to be about seventeen, and I see by the compression of your pretty
mouth that you consider yourself quite a judge and an authority. Only
take care you don't grow up into one of those Giants yourself! There
is something very suspicious to me in the glance of your eye.
"Ridiculous!" murmurs the fair damsel in question.
Not at all so: only you travel too fast; by which I mean you speak too
hastily. You learn Italian, I dare say? Oh yes, of course, for you
sing. Well then, Ombra adorata that is "beloved shadow;" aspetta
that is, "wait"--"wait, my beloved shadow" (of a charming young lady),
give me breathing time, and I will explain myself. As you are an
Italian student, I presume you have heard of the great Italian poet
Dante. Now Dante in his Convito or "Banquet" tells his readers that
writings may be understood, and therefore ought to be explained in
four different senses or meanings. There is first the literal sense;
secondly, the allegorical; thirdly, the moral; and fourthly, the
anagorical. Now I know you can't explain this last word to me, for I
would wager a large sum that you never tasted of Dante's Banquet--no,
not so much as the smallest crumb from it; and therefore how should
you know what he means by the anagorical sense? Give me leave to have
the honour of enlightening you, then. The anagorical is what the
dictionaries call the anagogical sense. A sense beyond this world; a
sense above the senses; a spiritual sense making common things divine.
It is hard to be arrived at and difficult of comprehension. Now in the
matter of the nice little boy's question about the Giant and the
carraway seed, (for none but a nice little boy could have excogitated
any thing so comical), I have set my heart upon talking to you about
it in the four above mentioned senses. And having already descanted on
the literal sense, I had just made an assertion which appertained to
the allegorical sense, when you so inopportunely interrupted me, My
Ombra Adorata, with your sharp observation about nonsense: so now we
will go on in peace and quietness, if you please.
In an allegorical sense the world is full of giants who cannot see
carraway seeds.
For what are Giants but great men and great women? and the world
abounds with people who consider themselves as belonging to that
class. And a great many of them--Giants of Cleverness, Giants of
Riches, Giants of Rank--Giants of I know not how many things besides,
who are walking about the world every day, very often feel themselves
to be quite raised above the point of attending to trifles; so that
you see I may (in an allegorical sense) say strictly of them that they
cannot see carraway seeds. Oh my dears, however elevated you may be,
or may become; however great or rich or learned, beware, I pray you,
of being a Giant who cannot see a carraway seed!
For, as my explanation of the moral sense now goes on to show you;
it is so far from being, as these Giants suppose, a proof of their
superiority that they cannot see or notice things they consider
beneath them--that it is, in fact, an evidence of some imperfection or
defect in either their moral or intellectual structure. Just as it is
a proof of our eyes being imperfect, that we cannot see the little
water insects as well as a great big elephant. I am sure you will
allow there is nothing to boast of in this, and so if the
contemplation of great things makes you incapable of attending to
small ones, do remember that 'tis nothing to boast about or be proud
of. And take very great care you make no mistakes as to what is great
and what is insignificant. With which warning I close my remarks on
the moral lesson, and proceed to that anagogical or spiritual
meaning, which will I hope be my justification for dwelling so long on
the subject, and my best introduction to a story of a serious though
not of a melancholy character. But first, my dear little readers, let
me call upon you in the words which you hear in church:
  "Lift up your hearts!"
and I would have you answer,
  "We lift them up unto the Lord."
For it is indeed of Him--the Lord of all Lords, that I now wish to
speak to you. He made the Sun and Stars and the great mountains of our
earth; but He made also the smallest insects that crowd the air and
water, and which are invisible to our imperfect eyes.
He rules the nations by His word, and "binds kings in chains, and
nobles with links of iron," as the psalm expresses it; but also not a
sparrow falls to the ground without His knowledge and consent. Angels
and Archangels worship around His throne, but His ears are equally
open to the prayer of the youngest child who lifts up its little heart
to Him!
The universe is at His feet, but the smallest events of our lives are
under His especial superintendence and care. Yes! nothing, however
small and insignificant, that is connected with the present or future
welfare of the smallest and most insignificant of his creatures, is
beneath the notice of God!
Ah! here is indeed a lesson for the fancied Giants of the world!--For,
in this picture of Almighty greatness combined with infinite
condescension, we see that real Perfection requires no Pride to
elevate it.
But I said this anagogical sense was hard to be attained to and
difficult of comprehension.
And is it not so? Is it not very difficult to believe thoroughly that
the great God whom we hear about, really and truly cares how we behave
and what we do--really and truly listens to our prayers--really and
truly takes as much interest in us as our earthly Fathers and Mothers
do?
Ah, I am sure it must be very difficult, because so few people do it,
although we should all be both better and happier if we did. We should
say our prayers so much more earnestly, try to keep out of sin and
naughtiness so much more heartily, and, above all, always be contented
with whatever happened; for who could be anxious, and discontented
about their condition or circumstances, if they quite believed that
every thing that happened to them was watched over and arranged for
their good, by the wisest, kindest, and most powerful of Beings? If
you, my dear children, who have been reading the fairy tales in this
book, were to be told that a most wise, most kind, and most powerful
Fairy had suddenly taken you for life under her particular care, and
that she would never lose sight of you by night or by day, how
delighted you would be!
Yet just so are you under the particular care and watchful concern of
Almighty God!
But now, say you, you begin to feel the difficulty of believing it
possible that the great God of the Universe takes this tender interest
in such insignificant and sinful creatures as men and women.
Consider, then, that we are told that "God is Love;" and if He loves
us, there is no difficulty in believing that He feels all this
interest in us. Do not judge Him by earthly Kings and Potentates.
These are Giants who cannot see carraway seeds. We do not blame them,
for it is impossible they should be interested for every body. But
very very different is both the power and the feeling of the King of
Kings!
Still we have not got over the difficulty yet, for of all the
wonderful truths we are commanded to believe, no one is so wonderful
and so incomprehensible as the Love of God to the sinful human race.
And yet it is a truth, and of all truths the most important and most
comfortable; and therefore it is much to be desired that we should
thoroughly believe it: and I think I can make you understand that it
is possible, by something which you feel in your own hearts. I think
God has placed even in our own hearts a witness of the possibility of
this great Truth.
My idea is this. We know that God has been merciful to us--(His very
creation of man was an act of mercy), and therefore we know that He
loves us. He loves us because He has been merciful to us. If you
cannot see why this should be, I refer you to the following story, and
advise you to try for yourselves. Only be kind to any living
creature, whether a human being, or an irrational animal, and see if
you can keep your heart from loving it! Certainly it does not become
us to try to search out the unsearchable mind of God, but I think it
is permitted us to hope, that the remarkable fast of Kindness
engendering Love, which we experience in our own hearts, is intended
to lead us upwards as by a holy guiding thread, to some comprehension
of the Love of that God, who in Christ Jesus actually gave Himself
for us.
THE TALE.
Lift up the curtain!
In a baronial hall, not of the size and grandeur of that at Warwick
Castle, which those who have never seen should try to see before they
die: but still in a hall as antique and interesting in style, fits a
young man reading.
It is evening, though the sun has not yet set, but it is evening, and
the young man is sitting at a small oak table in a recess in one of
the ancient windows, and before him lies open a book, and on the book,
which he touches not with his hands, but on which his eyes, blinded by
tears, are fixed, there lies a faded primrose.
The book is the Bible, and the faded primrose lies on that verse in
the Psalm, "Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his
goodness, and declare the wonders that he doeth for the children of
men!" and some hand had placed a slight pencil mark before these
words.
This scene brings before you a story of distress, and yet this young
man is the possessor of a large estate;--the baronial hall and house
are his own, and he is young and amiable, and till within the last few
months had led a life of almost uninterrupted comfort and prosperity
from his cradle upwards. Two years ago he became the betrothed lover
of a young lady no less interesting than himself, and as no obstacle
prevented their union, both had for these two years looked forward to
it, as the one certain and sure event of their lives. The young man's
parents had died when he was very young; but, in compliance with the
wishes of his Guardians, he deferred his marriage till he should have
come of age.
Meanwhile, as the time of probation drew near its close, it had been
his delight to sit up the old place in such a manner as should become
his bride, and the alterations had, in many cases, been made under her
eye and according to her wishes, for she was already by anticipation,
and in the heart of its owner, the mistress of the place.
At last the wedding day was fixed; but a few weeks before the time
came, one of those sad diseases which steal mysteriously into the
vitals of the young and wear away life long before its natural period,
fell upon her:--and now, nothing remained to him, who had hoped to
have her as his companion through life, but the Bible she had used
during her sickness, and which was found on the table by her couch
after her death, open and marked at the very place I have told you
about; together with the faded primrose which he had gathered for her
on the last morning of her life.
This was a very sad event for those who were left behind to lament the
loss of one whom they had loved so dearly. The Mother indeed, who had
known other trials of life, bent her head submissively to this one,
and cherishing sweet recollections of her daughter's piety and
goodness, looked forward to a time of reunion in a happier world. But
the poor young man, whose name was Theodore, never having known a care
or a sorrow before, was stupefied and overpowered by this sudden
destruction of all his hopes and happiness. Seeing, however, that
her last thought had been the mercy and goodness of God, he tried to
make it his thought too; and he would sit for hours looking at the
verse which she had marked in the Bible.
But unfortunately he made no effort besides, and having no kind
relatives or friends near him to rouse him from his melancholy stupor
to some of the active duties of life, he spent many many weeks in
listless sorrow, not caring much what became either of himself, his
dependents, or his property. And though he had become, by degrees, so
far resigned as to believe that every thing was for the best--even
her death--he now took up a strange and dismal fancy, that though
the Almighty was a God of goodness and justice, it was quite
impossible that He should love any beings so sinful and ungrateful
as the human race. This vain distinction of a morbid imagination was
the result of that solitude, inactivity, and the constantly dwelling
upon himself and his own troubles, to which he had unfortunately given
himself up, and which had brought his mind into such an unhealthy
state, that he could neither reason nor think properly.
In this condition of feeling, having one day wandered to a
considerable distance from home, he sat down on the greensward to
rest; when lo! after he had remained there for some little time
musing, as usual, he saw approaching him two shining creatures, who
looked like spirits or angels, and as they came up to him they looked
at him very earnestly, and one said to the other,
"He is doubting the goodness of God!?"
Then Theodore shuddered, and said, "I am not! once perhaps I did, but
not now: all things happen for the best." Yet the Spirit repeated, "He
is doubting the goodness of God!" Theodore shuddered again, and cried
out "I am not!" for he felt as if it was a heavy accusation.
Whereupon the Spirit continued, "To disbelieve the love of God is to
doubt His goodness."
"No, no," exclaimed Theodore eagerly, "it is not! I do not doubt His
goodness--His compassion even for the wretched creatures whom He
formed out of dust. But I--thoughtless in my youth; self-confident in
prosperity; ungrateful and rebellious under affliction; how can such a
wretch as I have been, believe in the love of God to me! God is
good and just, but do not talk to me of His Love to man, as if it were
possible He could feel for them the tenderness of kind affection! Who
are you?"
Without noticing this question, the Spirit repeated, in emphatic
tones, "To disbelieve the Love of God is to doubt His goodness, and
deny the perfection of His nature!"
"I tell you, No!" shouted Theodore, wildly: "It is because of His
goodness and because of the perfection of His nature, that I
disbelieve the possibility of His Love to the wretched race of man!"
"Judge by your own heart!" exclaimed the Spirit who had not yet
spoken.
But when Theodore raised his eyes to look upon her, both had
disappeared. He felt grieved, he knew not why. "My own heart!" he
murmured; "ah! my own heart has been the witness against me. It has
taught me the dreadful truth."
"Truth never yet was found of him who leads a life of selfish misery,"
whispered a soft voice receding into the distance; "Theodore! Judge by
your own heart. Even it may teach you better things!"
Theodore started up and looked hastily around. He felt as if he could
have followed that soft receding voice into eternity. But there was no
one near. That sound, however, had been like an echo from hopes buried
in the grave; and the poor youth sank to the ground on his knees, and,
hiding his face in his hands, wept bitterly. Suddenly one thought took
possession of him out of what had been said. And it was one (as usual)
of self-reproach. The Spirit had reproached him with leading a life of
selfish misery! Vividly impressed by this idea, he started off
hurriedly for his home, crying aloud--"Oh, the wasted time; the lost
hours; the precious moments that might have been employed in
usefulness!" And thus he pursued his way till he had left the outer
country behind him, and had entered the gates that bounded his
extensive domain when, all at once, his course was stopped by
something he struck against as he was walking quickly along.
Looking down, he perceived that a sickly, hungry-looking child was
stretched across the road asleep, and that by its side sat a woman,
the picture of misery and want. Theodore felt a strong sensation of
compassion seize him as he gazed at the child, and he stooped and
lifted it from the ground.
The woman observed Theodore's eye, and said, "Ay, without help we
shall neither of us be here long!"
"I will help you," said Theodore, "tell me what I can do!"
"What can you or any one do, for a dying woman and a half-starved
child?" groaned the poor creature. "Food, food! medicine and help!"
These words burst from her in broken accents--I am dying!"
"Are you so very ill?" asked Theodore, turning deadly pale; and he
murmured to himself--"Death again! I dare not see it again so soon!
Here!" continued he, thrusting gold into her hand, "now you see that I
will help you! Look, I will send you food, and you shall be brought
to the house: but let me take the child, he cannot do you good, and I
will see to him." "He must not see her die;" was Theodore's inward
thought.
"Ay, take him," muttered the woman gloomily, "and send me cordials. No
one wants to go even an hour before their time!"
Theodore obeyed almost mechanically, and lifting up the little boy, he
made a shift to carry him to the house. On arriving there, he called
for his housekeeper and desired her to take food and wine to the woman
he had left, and to bring her to the house. Then he sent another
servant for a doctor, and afterwards undertook himself the care of the
forlorn child. He placed him on a sofa in his study and sat down by
"Are you ill?" was his first question.
"I don't know," was the answer.
"Are you hungry?"
"Very!"
Here Theodore got up and went to the next room, where preparations
were being made for dinner, and fetched bread and gave it to the boy,
who ate it greedily, without once lifting up his eyes. "Poor child,"
thought Theodore, "life has no mental troubles for him!"
"Are you sorry your mother is so ill?" was his next inquiry.
"She's not my mother," muttered the boy.
Theodore started--"What do you mean? Are you not that woman's
child?"
"No! She told me I wasn't."
"Who are you, then?"
"I don't know. She told me she had stolen me to beg for her."
"And do you remember nothing about it?"
"No, its too long ago."
Theodore now fetched him more bread, but whilst he was eating it he no
longer sat by him, but walked up and down the room. Every now and then
as he stopped and looked at the thin, sickly looking object he had
brought into the house, he was overtaken by a strong feeling of pity
for his miserable condition.
This child was as desolate as himself, only in another way. Stolen
from his parents to beg for the strange woman, he had lived with her
so long that he had forgotten his real home altogether! Bound by no
ties of kindred and comfort to this world. "He is more desolate than I
am myself!" repeated Theodore, again and again.
After a time he approached the boy again.
"The woman will say you are her child, and make you go back and beg
for her if she gets better, will she not?"
"She doesn't want me now."
"How so?"
"She says, I'm too hungry, and eat all the bread away from her, and
don't get enough for us both."
A curious expression passed across Theodore's face as he turned away
and sat down in his chair once more. It looked like a gleam of
satisfaction. The boy, meanwhile, sat quite still, looking round the
room. He had a grave and somewhat interesting face, but that the dark
eyes looked a little too keen and restless to be quite pleasant.
Still, when he smiled, and he had smiled brightly when he first saw
the bread, his countenance improved; and there was, besides, something
about his open forehead which redeemed the covert expression of his
eye. He was about seven years old, and precocious in quickness of a
particular kind, as is very often the case with vagrant children.
Theodore's reverie was broken at last by the arrival of his good old
housekeeper, who came in, flurried and indignant, to inform him that
the woman she had been in search of was no where to be found. She had
been, "she was sure," up and down all the carriage roads, and made
enquiries at all the lodges, and finally discovered that a beggar
woman had passed out at one of them upwards of an hour before, very
hurriedly, and indeed almost at a running pace.
Theodore glanced at the child, but his countenance never changed. Only
he sat eying the housekeeper as she spoke, apparently indifferent to
the result. The housekeeper now began to ejaculate in broken
sentences, "The base creature! To think that you should have taken all
this trouble, Sir! and had the child actually into the house!
and--gracious me," added she in a half whisper, "hadn't I better call
the butler, Sir; hadn't he" (nodding significantly towards the child)
"better be taken to the workhouse at once, Sir?"
"I think not," answered Theodore slowly--"not yet, I think. The truth
is, I find he's not her own child, but has been stolen; and--and--in
fact, we can send him to the workhouse to-morrow. Perhaps, after all,
the woman may come here for him. But, at any rate, there is time
enough. You see this is an odd affair; and, as the boy is not hers,
we don't know who he may not turn out to be some day." And, as
Theodore thus concluded his sentence, he got up and looked at the old
housekeeper with a smile--a melancholy one it is true, but still it
was a smile--the first that had been seen on his face since his
terrible bereavement.
And the faithful servant was so much pleased that she forgot every
thing else in a desire to keep up the interest that had lured her
young master so unaccountably from his misery.
"Well, to be sure, Sir, what you say's quite right, and we can make
the poor thing comfortable for to-night, and then you can do as you
please to-morrow. Shall I take him with me, Sir, and make him clean,
while you dine? I can borrow some tidy clothes from the bailiff's
wife, I dare say; and after he's made respectable, you can see him
again, Sir, if you think proper."
This proposition was more grateful to Theodore's mind than he cared to
acknowledge to himself. Indeed he had no clear ideas of his feelings
about the little accident that had interrupted the dismal course of
his life; and he studiously avoided questioning himself too closely.
Only there came across him, every now and then, a sensation that there
was some special providence about it all, and that there was some
mysterious connection between this adventure and the words of the
apparitions who had spoken to him in the morning.
But "let be, let us see what will happen," was the ruling feeling, and
as he felt less miserable than usual, he did not wish to disturb the
pleasing dream by enquiries, why?
After his solitary dinner, as he was seated alone in his arm chair, he
was relapsing fast into his usual unhappy state of mind, for this was
at all times the most trying part of the day to him, when a knock at
the door aroused him.
Ah, it was the good old housekeeper again! She who, with the acute
instinct of sorrow-soothing which women so eminently possess, had
purposely come at this the young master's "dark hour," to try if it
could be kept back by the charm she had seen working a short time
before. "The little fellow is quite fit to come in now, Sir, if you'd
wish to see him before he's put to bed." And her efforts were rewarded
by seeing a look of interest light up poor Theodore's eye. The boy was
now ushered in, and his improved appearance and cleanliness were very
striking. Theodore took hold of his hand--"There, you need not be
afraid; you may sit down upon that chair. Are you comfortable?" "Yes."
"Have you had plenty to eat?" "Yes, plenty." And the child laughed a
little.
"I hope you are a good boy."
He looked stupid. "Can you say your prayers?"
"What's that?"
"Ah! I was afraid not. You never heard about God?" "Yes; but the woman
used to keep that to herself." "Keep what?"
"Why," for God's sake, when she begged. She didn't let me say it, but
she always said it herself; and then, when people wouldn't give us any
thing, she used to say--"
"No, no! I will not hear about that;" interrupted Theodore, "but I
hope some day you will learn about God."
"In the begging? must I say it in the begging next time?"
"No, I don't mean that; not in begging bread of people in the road,
but in praying."
"What's that?" "Begging." "Then I am to beg?" "No, not on the road,
but of a great good Being, who will never refuse what you ask."
"Is that you?"
"No, my poor boy; not me, but the great Being, called God, who lives
in the sky. You must beg all you want of Him."
"I don't know Him."
"No; but you will learn to know Him when you have listened to me and
prayed to Him."
"I don't know praying; I know begging."
"Well, then, when you have begged Him--"
"What am I to say?"
"First, you must say, 'Our Father--'"
"Father's dead," interrupted the boy;
"Ah, but I do not mean that father," answered Theodore; "and how do
you know even that that father is dead?"
"The woman said so. One day she told me Father and Mother were both
dead, and there was nobody left to love me, so I must mind her."
"The woman was wrong," cried Theodore compassionately. "You have
another Father, who never dies, and who loves you always!--"
A knock at the door interrupted Theodore's lesson on the Love of
God.
"It's about time the poor thing was put to bed," suggested the
housekeeper, looking in. "I dare say he's tired."
"I dare say he is," said Theodore mechanically. "Good night, little
boy. What used they to call you?"
"Reuben."
"Good night, little Reuben." And he was taken away.
You have another Father who never dies and who loves you always!
founded like an echo through the room. Theodore arose and looked
around, but there was no one there. He resumed his feat, and wondered
how he had got involved in teaching the beggar boy religion. He
lamented his awkwardness and unfitness for the talk; but still he
thought he had done right. As to his last assertion, how else could he
make the child comprehend God at all? Besides, how cruel it would be
to infect him with his own miserable convictions. They would come time
enough, perhaps!
Such was the current of his thoughts. The next morning he told the old
housekeeper of the boy's ignorance and his difficulty with him, and
engaged her to help him in his talk, which she readily undertook.
It is not my intention to describe the many endeavours Theodore made
to impress the first great truths of Christianity upon Reuben's mind;
but I can assure you he felt all the better for them himself. How it
was that he never sent the little boy to the workhouse you can guess.
For the first few days he kept him to see (as he said), if the woman
would come back for him. Then he wished him to stay till he and the
housekeeper had sufficiently impressed him by their lessons. And
then--why then--by degrees, all mention of the workhouse ceased, and
better clothes were bought for him; and the housekeeper, who was one
of the by-gone generation of warm-hearted old family servants, became,
for her master's sake, a perfect mother to him; and to Theodore he
involuntarily proved an object of daily increasing interest, and
finally, of strong personal affection.
And thus nearly a year passed over, during which time Theodore's
health and activity in a measure returned; but the cheerfulness of a
happy mind was still wanting. Reuben often lured him temporarily into
it, but he would again relapse, and had never given up his unhappy
theory, though now he dwelt upon it much less frequently than of old.
At the end of the year, however, Theodore was much distressed by
fancying that he detected Reuben in lying; and he was, besides, by no
means sure that little trifles were not taken from him by the child
for his own use and amusement. He communicated his suspicions to the
housekeeper, and alas! found his worst fears confirmed. The pain and
sorrow he felt at this discovery were of a kind totally new to him.
But the strongest feeling of all was, that he would not give up the
boy to vicious habits without a struggle (cost what it might) to save
him! The housekeeper told him, with tears, that she had observed
Reuben's habit of petty lying and taking any thing he fancied, very
soon after his admission to the house; but she confessed that she had
not had the heart to inform her young Master, lest he should send the
boy away who had seemed to take him so out of his trouble! This was
what she most thought about. So she had tried to correct the child
herself, but not with the success she had desired. "How little she
knows the heart," thought Theodore, "his evil propensities would have
been an additional claim upon my kindness!"
I will pass over all that Theodore said to the boy himself. No father
could have been more earnest, more solemn in his warnings, or more
kind in his expostulations. Reuben, by this time, could understand all
he said, and shame and repentance burnt in his face during a painful
interview. It is right to remind you, dear children, of the many
excuses that were to be made for him. He had been brought up, till
seven years old, in total ignorance of God, and without ever having
heard one duty commanded or one sin forbidden. The woman lied daily
and hourly in his sight, and made him do the same; and she took all
she could lay hold of in any way, and beat him if he did not follow
her example; and although Theodore's instructions had opened a new
world on the child's mind, the evil HABITS were not so soon got rid
of. So there the mischief was; and now the great difficulty Theodore
felt, was to know what to do for the best. And, after much
consideration, he decided to send him to school, as the likeliest
means of eradicating the bad habits the boy had acquired. I say
habits, rather than dispositions, for there was indeed nothing mean
or sneaking about his character. On the contrary, he was both
courageous and generous in the turn of his mind, and, after his health
improved, his manners partook of the same freedom and candour.
To school therefore poor Reuben went; and Theodore was almost
astonished himself at the blank which his absence created.
But having desired that continued reports should be sent to him of his
conduct, he meanwhile began seriously to think what was to become of
him hereafter. At last it occurred to him that he might employ him in
some way or other about his property; and with a view to this,
Theodore himself began to take more interest in his estate than he had
had the energy to bestow before, and made himself more intimately
acquainted with the wants and modes of life of those under his
control.
Thus another year passed away in quiet but constant occupation; and
the many opportunities Theodore now had of doing good, softened and
cheered his mind. But he was not quite cured. For of all things in the
world whims are the very hardest to cure, because, reason as you will,
people still stick to their whims. Reuben was not allowed to return
once during that year to the old hall. During the last few months,
however, his progress had been most satisfactory, and the Master
considered that the evil was overcome; and so, at the end of the year,
Theodore wrote word to Reuben that he wished him to come "home" for
his holidays. Poor Reuben cried bitterly again when he read the
letter; for, as he said to the Master, "It is not my home, though he
has been very good to me. I have no home!"
Theodore's heart overflowed with pleasure and almost pride when he saw
the boy again. Every turn in the expression of his face was improved;
and when Theodore first took his hand, the lad bent his face over it
and sobbed out an entreaty for pardon for his dreadful wickedness.
"Reuben," cried Theodore, "never say that again. All is forgotten
since your conduct is changed. Forget the past as soon as possible. It
will never be remembered by me."
Time went on during the holidays very happily on the whole. In fact
there was no drawback; but that now and then Theodore, who would often
sit looking at his adopted child's face, noticed a painful expression
which he could not account for. His conduct was irreproachable and his
respect for Theodore seemed, if possible, increased; but he would not
be frank with him, and no encouragement beguiled him into the ease of
trusted affection. Theodore did not choose to notice this for some
weeks, but, as the time of Reuben's return to school drew near, he was
unwilling to let him go without some expostulation.
"Reuben," said he one day, "you are going back to school. Your conduct
has quite satisfied me: but tell me, before you go, why you so often
look unhappy? It is a poor return (though I now touch on this subject
for the first time in my life), it is a poor return for the interest I
have taken in you; and for the real love you know I feel towards you!"
For a moment Reuben's large dark eyes glanced up at Theodore's face;
but they sank again as quickly: his cheeks grew crimson, and tears
rolled over them which he could not conceal.
"What is the matter, Reuben; what is the meaning of this? Am I loving
one who does not love me in return?"
"You cannot love me, Sir!" ejaculated the boy so earnestly that it
quite startled his companion.
"Reuben, what can you mean? Have you forgotten how I have taken you
and acted by you as if I had been your Father. I cannot love you?
What else but love for you has made me do what I have done?"
"That was all your goodness and the kindness of your heart, Sir. You
couldn't love me when you picked me up in the road. It was pity and
kindness, and it has been the same ever since; not Love--" and the
tears again struggled to his eyes.
Theodore rushed suddenly from the room and into his private apartment,
and falling on his knees, spread his hands over his head in prayer.
"My Lord and my God!" cried he solemnly, "what means this echo from my
own heart? Am I awake, or do I dream?" A profound silence was around
him; but, as he arose and opened his eyes, he beheld before him,
though fading rapidly from his sight, the angelic visions he had seen
two years before.
He returned to Reuben, who was sitting at the table, his face buried
in his arms.
Theodore laid his hand upon him. "Reuben, look up! You are under a
great mistake. You are but a boy, and must not fancy you know the ins
and outs of the human heart. Reuben, I do love you, and have always
loved you."
"You cannot, Sir!"
"Again? and why not?"
"You are too much above me; I am an outcast, and was a beggar. It
wasn't likely you could love me at any time. Besides, there has been
something since."
"What?"
"You told me to forget it, Sir, but I cannot. After all your kindness
and goodness, and trying to make me happy and do me every good, I was
all along (during the first year), doing what was wrong, deceiving you
and injuring you. I am not only an outcast, but I have been wicked and
ungrateful, and made you unhappy by my misconduct. Indeed I cannot
bear to think of it; but I dare not deceive myself about your Love,
Sir! I know you cannot love me; but I am so grateful to you for your
goodness, I hope you will not be angry with me for speaking the truth:
only, though I am grateful and try to be contented, I cannot be as
happy as if you did love me."
As Theodore gazed on poor Reuben's face, he saw standing behind him
the beautiful visions once more.
"Now judge by your own heart!" murmured the Spirits, as smiling they
disappeared.
And Theodore did so. Going up to Reuben, he put his arms around him,
and wept over him tears of love and gratitude for the blessing which
he felt stealing into his own mind. "Reuben," cried he, "my child
Reuben! There have been but two human beings in the world on whom I
have bestowed my love; for, like you, I lost my parents young. These
two were--her I lost and yourself!"
"If I thought you loved me, I would die for you!" cried Reuben,
springing up and gazing earnestly on Theodore's face.
"My God!" murmured Theodore, "may I be able to feel this to Thee!"
       *        *        *        *        *
I think more words are unnecessary. You cannot doubt that Theodore
soon convinced Reuben of his love, nor that Theodore took the lesson
to himself, and now saw that God had placed in the human heart a
witness of the possibility of His love to man. Yes, the clinging
affection we feel for those we have been kind to; our own power of
forgiving any thing to them; is an instinct which has been
mercifully implanted in our hearts to teach us to believe in that Love
of God, which is otherwise so incredible to human reason.
If you care to know what became of Theodore and Reuben, you must in
fancy pass over a few years. Reuben soon had so strong a wish to go to
sea, that he entered the merchant service; and by the time he became
Master of his own vessel and revisited the hall when he came ashore,
Theodore was to be found there with a kind and gentle wife by his
side; and frolicking about the ancient hall were a parcel of noisy
children, to whom the arrival from sea of him whom they always
unaccountably would call "Uncle Reuben," was ever a gala treat. Dear
readers, Farewell!
BENEDICITE.
The Pied Piper
Newtown, or Franchville, as 't was called of old, is a sleepy little
town, as you all may know, upon the Solent shore. Sleepy as it is now,
it was once noisy enough, and what made the noise was--rats. The place
was so infested with them as to be scarce worth living in. There wasn't
a barn or a corn-rick, a store-room or a cupboard, but they ate their
way into it. Not a cheese but they gnawed it hollow, not a sugar
puncheon but they cleared out. Why the very mead and beer in the barrels
was not safe from them. They'd gnaw a hole in the top of the tun, and
down would go one master rat's tail, and when he brought it up round
would crowd all the friends and cousins, and each would have a suck at
the tail.
Had they stopped here it might have been borne. But the squeaking and
shrieking, the hurrying and scurrying, so that you could neither hear
yourself speak nor get a wink of good honest sleep the live-long night!
Not to mention that, Mamma must needs sit up, and keep watch and ward
over baby's cradle, or there'd have been a big ugly rat running across
the poor little fellow's face, and doing who knows what mischief.
Why didn't the good people of the town have cats? Well they did, and
there was a fair stand-up fight, but in the end the rats were too many,
and the pussies were regularly driven from the field. Poison, I hear you
say? Why, they poisoned so many that it fairly bred a plague.
Ratcatchers! Why there wasn't a ratcatcher from John o' Groat's house to
the Land's End that hadn't tried his luck. But do what they might, cats
or poison, terrier or traps, there seemed to be more rats than ever, and
every day a fresh rat was cocking his tail or pricking his whiskers.
The Mayor and the town council were at their wits' end. As they were
sitting one day in the town hall racking their poor brains, and
bewailing their hard fate, who should run in but the town beadle.
"Please your Honour," says he, "here is a very queer fellow come to
town. I don't rightly know what to make of him." "Show him in," said the
Mayor, and in he stepped. A queer fellow, truly. For there wasn't a
colour of the rainbow but you might find it in some corner of his dress,
and he was tall and thin, and had keen piercing eyes.
"I'm called the Pied Piper," he began. "And pray what might you be
willing to pay me, if I rid you of every single rat in Franchville?"
Well, much as they feared the rats, they feared parting with their money
more, and fain would they have higgled and haggled. But the Piper was
not a man to stand nonsense, and the upshot was that fifty pounds were
promised him (and it meant a lot of money in those old days) as soon as
not a rat was left to squeak or scurry in Franchville.
Out of the hall stepped the Piper, and as he stepped he laid his pipe to
his lips and a shrill keen tune sounded through street and house. And as
each note pierced the air you might have seen a strange sight. For out
of every hole the rats came tumbling. There were none too old and none
too young, none too big and none too little to crowd at the Piper's
heels and with eager feet and upturned noses to patter after him as he
paced the streets. Nor was the Piper unmindful of the little toddling
ones, for every fifty yards he'd stop and give an extra flourish on his
pipe just to give them time to keep up with the older and stronger of
the band.
Up Silver Street he went, and down Gold Street, and at the end of Gold
Street is the harbour and the broad Solent beyond. And as he paced
along, slowly and gravely, the townsfolk flocked to door and window, and
many a blessing they called down upon his head.
As for getting near him there were too many rats. And now that he was at
the water's edge he stepped into a boat, and not a rat, as he shoved off
into deep water, piping shrilly all the while, but followed him,
plashing, paddling, and wagging their tails with delight. On and on he
played and played until the tide went down, and each master rat sank
deeper and deeper in the slimy ooze of the harbour, until every mother's
son of them was dead and smothered.
The tide rose again, and the Piper stepped on shore, but never a rat
followed. You may fancy the townsfolk had been throwing up their caps
and hurrahing and stopping up rat holes and setting the church bells
a-ringing. But when the Piper stepped ashore and not so much as a single
squeak was to be heard, the Mayor and the Council, and the townsfolk
generally, began to hum and to ha and to shake their heads.
For the town money chest had been sadly emptied of late, and where was
the fifty pounds to come from? Such an easy job, too! Just getting into
a boat and playing a pipe! Why the Mayor himself could have done that if
only he had thought of it.
So he hummed and ha'ad and at last, "Come, my good man," said he, "you
see what poor folk we are; how can we manage to pay you fifty pounds?
Will you not take twenty? When all is said and done, 't will be good pay
for the trouble you've taken."
"Fifty pounds was what I bargained for," said the piper shortly; "and if
I were you I'd pay it quickly. For I can pipe many kinds of tunes, as
folk sometimes find to their cost."
"Would you threaten us, you strolling vagabond?" shrieked the Mayor, and
at the same time he winked to the Council; "the rats are all dead and
drowned," muttered he; and so "You may do your worst, my good man," and
with that he turned short upon his heel.
"Very well," said the Piper, and he smiled a quiet smile. With that he
laid his pipe to his lips afresh, but now there came forth no shrill
notes, as it were, of scraping and gnawing, and squeaking and scurrying,
but the tune was joyous and resonant, full of happy laughter and merry
play. And as he paced down the streets the elders mocked, but from
school-room and play-room, from nursery and workshop, not a child but
ran out with eager glee and shout following gaily at the Piper's call.
Dancing, laughing, joining hands and tripping feet, the bright throng
moved along up Gold Street and down Silver Street, and beyond Silver
Street lay the cool green forest full of old oaks and wide-spreading
beeches. In and out among the oak-trees you might catch glimpses of the
Piper's many-coloured coat. You might hear the laughter of the children
break and fade and die away as deeper and deeper into the lone green
wood the stranger went and the children followed.
All the while, the elders watched and waited. They mocked no longer now.
And watch and wait as they might, never did they set their eyes again
upon the Piper in his parti-coloured coat. Never were their hearts
gladdened by the song and dance of the children issuing forth from
amongst the ancient oaks of the forest.
Hereafterthis
Once upon a time there was a farmer called Jan, and he lived all alone
by himself in a little farmhouse.
By-and-by he thought that he would like to have a wife to keep it all
vitty for him.
So he went a-courting a fine maid, and he said to her: "Will you marry
me?"
"That I will, to be sure," said she.
So they went to church, and were wed. After the wedding was over, she
got up on his horse behind him, and he brought her home. And they lived
as happy as the day was long.
One day, Jan said to his wife, "Wife can you milk-y?"
"Oh, yes, Jan, I can milk-y. Mother used to milk-y, when I lived home."
So he went to market and bought her ten red cows. All went well till one
day when she had driven them to the pond to drink, she thought they did
not drink fast enough. So she drove them right into the pond to make
them drink faster, and they were all drowned.
When Jan came home, she up and told him what she had done, and he said,
"Oh, well, there, never mind, my dear, better luck next time."
So they went on for a bit, and then, one day, Jan said to his wife,
"Wife can you serve pigs?"
"Oh, yes, Jan, I can serve pigs. Mother used to serve pigs when I lived
home."
So Jan went to market and bought her some pigs. All went well till one
day, when she had put their food into the trough she thought they did
not eat fast enough, and she pushed their heads into the trough to make
them eat faster, and they were all choked.
"Wife can you bake-y?"
"Oh, yes, Jan, I can bake-y. Mother used to bake-y when I lived home."
So he bought everything for his wife so that she could bake bread. All
went well for a bit, till one day, she thought she would bake white
bread for a treat for Jan. So she carried her meal to the top of a high
hill, and let the wind blow on it, for she thought to herself that the
wind would blow out all the bran. But the wind blew away meal and bran
and all--so there was an end of it.
"Wife can you brew-y?"
"Oh, yes, Jan, I can brew-y. Mother used to brew-y when I lived home."
So he bought everything proper for his wife to brew ale with. All went
well for a bit, till one day when she had brewed her ale and put it in
the barrel, a big black dog came in and looked up in her face. She drove
him out of the house, but he stayed outside the door and still looked up
in her face. And she got so angry that she pulled out the plug of the
barrel, threw it at the dog, and said, "What dost look at me for? I be
Jan's wife." Then the dog ran down the road, and she ran after him to
chase him right away. When she came back again, she found that the ale
had all run out of the barrel, and so there was an end of it.
"Oh well, there, never mind, my dear, better luck next time."
So they went on for a bit, and then, one day, she thought to herself,
"'T is time to clean up my house." When she was taking down her big bed
she found a bag of groats on the tester. So when Jan came home, she up
and said to him, "Jan, what is that bag of groats on the tester for?"
"That is for Hereafterthis, my dear."
Now, there was a robber outside the window, and he heard what Jan said.
Next day, he waited till Jan had gone to market, and then he came and
knocked at the door. "What do you please to want?" said Mally.
"I am Hereafterthis," said the robber, "I have come for the bag of
groats."
Now the robber was dressed like a fine gentleman, so she thought to
herself it was very kind of so fine a man to come for the bag of groats,
so she ran upstairs and fetched the bag of groats, and gave it to the
robber and he went away with it.
When Jan came home, she said to him, "Jan, Hereafterthis has been for
the bag of groats."
"What do you mean, wife?" said Jan.
So she up and told him, and he said, "Then I'm a ruined man, for that
money was to pay our rent with. The only thing we can do is to roam the
world over till we find the bag of groats." Then Jan took the house-door
off its hinges, "That's all we shall have to lie on," he said. So Jan
put the door on his back, and they both set out to look for
Hereafterthis. Many a long day they went, and in the night Jan used to
put the door on the branches of a tree, and they would sleep on it. One
night they came to a big hill, and there was a high tree at the foot. So
Jan put the door up in it, and they got up in the tree and went to
sleep. By-and-by Jan's wife heard a noise, and she looked to see what it
was. It was an opening of a door in the side of the hill. Out came two
gentlemen with a long table, and behind them fine ladies and gentlemen,
each carrying a bag, and one of them was Hereafterthis with the bag of
groats. They sat round the table, and began to drink and talk and count
up all the money in the bags. So then Jan's wife woke him up, and asked
what they should do.
"Now's our time," said Jan, and he pushed the door off the branches,
and it fell right in the very middle of the table, and frightened the
robbers so that they all ran away. Then Jan and his wife got down from
the tree, took as many money-bags as they could carry on the door, and
went straight home. And Jan bought his wife more cows, and more pigs,
and they lived happy ever after.
The Golden Ball
There were two lasses, daughters of one mother, and as they came from
the fair, they saw a right bonny young man stand at the house-door
before them. They never saw such a bonny man before. He had gold on his
cap, gold on his finger, gold on his neck, a red gold watch-chain--eh!
but he had brass. He had a golden ball in each hand. He gave a ball to
each lass, and she was to keep it, and if she lost it, she was to be
hanged. One of the lasses, 't was the youngest, lost her ball. I'll tell
thee how. She was by a park-paling, and she was tossing her ball, and it
went up, and up, and up, till it went fair over the paling; and when she
climbed up to look, the ball ran along the green grass, and it went
right forward to the door of the house, and the ball went in and she saw
it no more.
So she was taken away to be hanged by the neck till she was dead because
she'd lost her ball.
But she had a sweetheart, and he said he would go and get the ball. So
he went to the park-gate, but 't was shut; so he climbed the hedge, and
when he got to the top of the hedge, an old woman rose up out of the
dyke before him, and said, if he wanted to get the ball, he must sleep
three nights in the house. He said he would.
Then he went into the house, and looked for the ball, but could not find
it. Night came on and he heard bogles move in the courtyard; so he
looked out o' the window, and the yard was full of them.
Presently he heard steps coming upstairs. He hid behind the door, and
was as still as a mouse. Then in came a big giant five times as tall as
he, and the giant looked round but did not see the lad, so he went to
the window and bowed to look out; and as he bowed on his elbows to see
the bogles in the yard, the lad stepped behind him, and with one blow of
his sword he cut him in twain, so that the top part of him fell in the
yard, and the bottom part stood looking out of the window.
There was a great cry from the bogles when they saw half the giant come
tumbling down to them, and they called out, "There comes half our
master, give us the other half."
So the lad said, "It's no use of thee, thou pair of legs, standing
alone at the window, as thou hast no eye to see with, so go join thy
brother;" and he cast the lower part of the giant after the top part.
Now when the bogles had gotten all the giant they were quiet.
Next night the lad was at the house again, and now a second giant came
in at the door, and as he came in the lad cut him in twain, but the legs
walked on to the chimney and went up them. "Go, get thee after thy
legs," said the lad to the head, and he cast the head up the chimney
too.
The third night the lad got into bed, and he heard the bogles striving
under the bed, and they had the ball there, and they were casting it to
and fro.
Now one of them has his leg thrust out from under the bed, so the lad
brings his sword down and cuts it off. Then another thrusts his arm out
at other side of the bed, and the lad cuts that off. So at last he had
maimed them all, and they all went crying and wailing off, and forgot
the ball, but he took it from under the bed, and went to seek his
true-love.
Now the lass was taken to York to be hanged; she was brought out on the
scaffold, and the hangman said, "Now, lass, thou must hang by the neck
till thou be'st dead." But she cried out:
     "Stop, stop, I think I see my mother coming!
     O mother, hast brought my golden ball
       And come to set me free?"
     "I've neither brought thy golden ball
       Nor come to set thee free,
     But I have come to see thee hung
       Upon this gallows-tree."
Then the hangman said, "Now, lass, say thy prayers for thou must die."
But she said:
     "Stop, stop, I think I see my father coming!
     O father, hast brought my golden ball
Then the hangman said, "Hast thee done thy prayers? Now, lass, put thy
head into the noose."
But she answered, "Stop, stop, I think I see my brother coming!" And
again she sang, and then she thought she saw her sister coming, then her
uncle, then her aunt, then her cousin; but after this the hangman said,
"I will stop no longer, thou 'rt making game of me. Thou must be hung at
once."
But now she saw her sweetheart coming through the crowd, and he held
over his head in the air her own golden ball; so she said:
     "Stop, stop, I see my sweetheart coming!
     Sweetheart, hast brought my golden ball
     "Aye, I have brought thy golden ball
       And come to set thee free,
     I have not come to see thee hung
And he took her home, and they lived happy ever after.
My Own Self
In a tiny house in the North Countrie, far away from any town or
village, there lived not long ago, a poor widow all alone with her
little son, a six-year-old boy.
The house-door opened straight on to the hill-side and all round about
were moorlands and huge stones, and swampy hollows; never a house nor a
sign of life wherever you might look, for their nearest neighbours were
the "ferlies" in the glen below, and the "will-o'-the-wisps" in the long
grass along the pathside.
And many a tale she could tell of the "good folk" calling to each other
in the oak-trees, and the twinkling lights hopping on to the very window
sill, on dark nights; but in spite of the loneliness, she lived on from
year to year in the little house, perhaps because she was never asked to
pay any rent for it.
But she did not care to sit up late, when the fire burnt low, and no one
knew what might be about; so, when they had had their supper she would
make up a good fire and go off to bed, so that if anything terrible
did happen, she could always hide her head under the bed-clothes.
This, however, was far too early to please her little son; so when she
called him to bed, he would go on playing beside the fire, as if he did
not hear her.
He had always been bad to do with since the day he was born, and his
mother did not often care to cross him; indeed, the more she tried to
make him obey her, the less heed he paid to anything she said, so it
usually ended by his taking his own way.
But one night, just at the fore-end of winter, the widow could not make
up her mind to go off to bed, and leave him playing by the fireside; for
the wind was tugging at the door, and rattling the window-panes, and
well she knew that on such a night, fairies and such like were bound to
be out and about, and bent on mischief. So she tried to coax the boy
into going at once to bed:
"The safest bed to bide in, such a night as this!" she said: but no, he
wouldn't.
Then she threatened to "give him the stick," but it was no use.
The more she begged and scolded, the more he shook his head; and when at
last she lost patience and cried that the fairies would surely come and
fetch him away, he only laughed and said he wished they would, for he
would like one to play with.
At that his mother burst into tears, and went off to bed in despair,
certain that after such words something dreadful would happen; while her
naughty little son sat on his stool by the fire, not at all put out by
her crying.
But he had not long been sitting there alone, when he heard a
fluttering sound near him in the chimney and presently down by his side
dropped the tiniest wee girl you could think of; she was not a span
high, and had hair like spun silver, eyes as green as grass, and cheeks
red as June roses. The little boy looked at her with surprise.
"Oh!" said he; "what do they call ye?"
"My own self," she said in a shrill but sweet little voice, and she
looked at him too. "And what do they call ye?"
"Just my own self too!" he answered cautiously; and with that they began
to play together.
She certainly showed him some fine games. She made animals out of the
ashes that looked and moved like life; and trees with green leaves
waving over tiny houses, with men and women an inch high in them, who,
when she breathed on them, fell to walking and talking quite properly.
But the fire was getting low, and the light dim, and presently the
little boy stirred the coals with a stick to make them blaze; when out
jumped a red-hot cinder, and where should it fall, but on the fairy
child's tiny foot.
Thereupon she set up such a squeal, that the boy dropped the stick, and
clapped his hands to his ears but it grew to so shrill a screech, that
it was like all the wind in the world whistling through one tiny
keyhole.
There was a sound in the chimney again, but this time the little boy did
not wait to see what it was, but bolted off to bed, where he hid under
the blankets and listened in fear and trembling to what went on.
A voice came from the chimney speaking sharply:
"Who's there, and what's wrong?" it said.
"It's my own self," sobbed the fairy-child; "and my foot's burnt sore.
O-o-h!"
"Who did it?" said the voice angrily; this time it sounded nearer, and
the boy, peeping from under the clothes, could see a white face looking
out from the chimney-opening.
"Just my own self too!" said the fairy-child again.
"Then if ye did it your own self," cried the elf-mother shrilly, "what's
the use o' making all this fash about it?"--and with that she
stretched out a long thin arm, and caught the creature by its ear, and,
shaking it roughly, pulled it after her, out of sight up the chimney.
The little boy lay awake a long time, listening, in case the
fairy-mother should come back after all; and next evening after supper,
his mother was surprised to find that he was willing to go to bed
whenever she liked.
"He's taking a turn for the better at last!" she said to herself; but he
was thinking just then that, when next a fairy came to play with him, he
might not get off quite so easily as he had done this time.
Black Bull of Norroway
In Norroway, long time ago, there lived a certain lady, and she had
three daughters: The oldest of them said to her mother: "Mother, bake me
a bannock, and roast me a collop, for I'm going away to seek my
fortune." Her mother did so; and the daughter went away to an old witch
washerwife and told her purpose. The old wife bade her stay that day,
and look out of her back-door, and see what she could see. She saw
nought the first day. The second day she did the same, and saw nought.
On the third day she looked again, and saw a coach-and-six coming along
the road. She ran in and told the old wife what she saw. "Well," quoth
the old woman, "yon's for you." So they took her into the coach and
galloped off.
The second daughter next says to her mother: "Mother, bake me a bannock,
and roast me a collop, for I'm going away to seek my fortune." Her
mother did so; and away she went to the old wife, as her sister had
done. On the third day she looked out of the back-door, and saw a
coach-and-four coming along the road. "Well," quoth the old woman,
"yon's for you." So they took her in, and off they set.
The third daughter says to her mother: "Mother, bake me a bannock, and
roast me a collop, for I'm going away to seek my fortune." Her mother
did so; and away she went to the old witch. She bade her look out of her
back-door, and see what she could see She did so; and when she came
back, said she saw nought. The second day she did the same, and saw
nought. The third day she looked again, and on coming back said to the
old wife she saw nought but a great Black Bull coming crooning along the
road. "Well," quoth the old witch, "yon's for you." On hearing this she
was next to distracted with grief and terror; but she was lifted up and
set on his back, and away they went.
Aye they travelled, and on they travelled, till the lady grew faint with
hunger. "Eat out of my right ear," says the Black Bull, "and drink out
of my left ear, and set by your leaving." So she did as he said, and was
wonderfully refreshed. And long they rode, and hard they rode, till
they came in sight of a very big and bonny castle. "Yonder we must be
this night," quoth the Bull; "for my elder brother lives yonder;" and
presently they were at the place. They lifted her off his back, and took
her in, and sent him away to a park for the night. In the morning, when
they brought the Bull home, they took the lady into a fine shining
parlour, and gave her a beautiful apple, telling her not to break it
till she was in the greatest strait ever mortal was in the world, and
that would bring her out of it. Again she was lifted on the Bull's back,
and after she had ridden far, and farther than I can tell, they came in
sight of a far bonnier castle, and far farther away than the last. Says
the Bull to her: "Yonder we must be this night, for my second brother
lives yonder;" and they were at the place directly. They lifted her down
and took her in, and sent the Bull to the field for the night. In the
morning they took the lady into a fine and rich room, and gave her the
finest pear she had ever seen, bidding her not to break it till she was
in the greatest strait ever mortal could be in, and that would get her
out of it. Again she was lifted and set on his back, and away they went.
And long they rode, and hard they rode, till they came in sight of the
far biggest castle and far farthest off, they had yet seen. "We must be
yonder to-night," says the Bull, "for my young brother lives yonder;"
and they were there directly. They lifted her down, took her in, and
sent the Bull to the field for the night. In the morning they took her
into a room, the finest of all, and gave her a plum, telling her not to
break it till she was in the greatest strait mortal could be in, and
that would get her out of it. Presently they brought home the Bull, set
the lady on his back, and away they went.
And aye they rode, and on they rode, till they came to a dark and ugsome
glen, where they stopped, and the lady lighted down. Says the Bull to
her: "Here you must stay till I go and fight the Old One. You must seat
yourself on that stone, and move neither hand nor foot till I come back,
else I'll never find you again. And if everything round about you turns
blue, I have beaten the Old One; but should all things turn red, he'll
have conquered me." She set herself down on the stone, and by-and-by all
round her turned blue. Overcome with joy, she lifted one of her feet,
and crossed it over the other, so glad was she that her companion was
victorious. The Bull returned and sought for her, but never could find
Long she sat, and aye she wept, till she wearied. At last she rose and
went away, she didn't know where. On she wandered, till she came to a
great hill of glass, that she tried all she could to climb, but wasn't
able. Round the bottom of the hill she went, sobbing and seeking a
passage over, till at last she came to a smith's house; and the smith
promised, if she would serve him seven years, he would make her iron
shoon, wherewith she could climb over the glassy hill. At seven years'
end she got her iron shoon, clomb the glassy hill, and chanced to come
to the old washerwife's habitation. There she was told of a gallant
young knight that had given in some clothes all over blood to wash, and
whoever washed them was to be his wife. The old wife had washed till she
was tired, and then she set her daughter at it, and both washed, and
they washed, and they washed, in hopes of getting the young knight; but
for all they could do they couldn't bring out a stain. At length they
set the stranger damsel to work; and whenever she began, the stains came
out pure and clean, and the old wife made the knight believe it was her
daughter had washed the clothes. So the knight and the eldest daughter
were to be married, and the stranger damsel was distracted at the
thought of it, for she was deeply in love with him. So she bethought her
of her apple and breaking it, found it filled with gold and precious
jewellery, the richest she had ever seen. "All these," she said to the
eldest daughter, "I will give you, on condition that you put off your
marriage for one day and allow me to go into his room alone at night."
The lady consented; but meanwhile the old wife had prepared a sleeping
drink, and given it to the knight who drank it, and never wakened till
next morning. The live-long night the damsel sobbed and sang:
     "Seven long years I served for thee,
      The glassy hill I clomb for thee,
      Thy bloody clothes I wrang for thee;
      And wilt thou not waken and turn to me?"
[Illustration: THE GLASSY HILL I CLOMB FOR THEE]
Next day she knew not what to do for grief. Then she broke the pear, and
found it filled with jewellery far richer than the contents of the
apple. With these jewels she bargained for permission to be a second
night in the young knight's chamber; but the old wife gave him another
sleeping drink, and again he slept till morning. All night she kept
sighing and singing as before:
Still he slept, and she nearly lost hope altogether, But that day, when
he was out hunting, somebody asked him what noise and moaning was that
they heard all last night in his bedchamber. He said: "I have heard no
noise." But they assured him there was; and he resolved to keep waking
that night to try what he could hear. That being the third night and the
damsel being between hope and despair, she broke her plum, and it held
far the richest jewellery of the three. She bargained as before; and the
old wife, as before, took in the sleeping drink to the young knight's
chamber; but he told her he couldn't drink it that night without
sweetening. And when she went away for some honey to sweeten it with, he
poured out the drink, and so made the old wife think he had drunk it.
They all went to bed again, and the damsel began, as before, singing:
He heard, and turned to her. And she told him all that had befallen
her, and he told her all that had happened to him. And he caused the old
washerwife and her daughter to be burnt. And they were married, and he
and she are living happy to this day for aught I know.
Yallery Brown
Once upon a time, and a very good time it was, though it wasn't in my
time, nor in your time, nor any one else's time, there was a young lad
of eighteen or so named Tom Tiver working on the Hall Farm. One Sunday
he was walking across the west field, 't was a beautiful July night,
warm and still and the air was full of little sounds as though the trees
and grass were chattering to themselves. And all at once there came a
bit ahead of him the pitifullest greetings ever he heard, sob, sobbing,
like a bairn spent with fear, and nigh heartbroken; breaking off into a
moan and then rising again in a long whimpering wailing that made him
feel sick to hark to it. He began to look everywhere for the poor
creature. "It must be Sally Bratton's child," he thought to himself;
"she was always a flighty thing, and never looked after it. Like as not,
she's flaunting about the lanes, and has clean forgot the babby." But
though he looked and looked, he could see nought. And presently the
whimpering got louder and stronger in the quietness, and he thought he
could make out words of some sort. He hearkened with all his ears, and
the sorry thing was saying words all mixed up with sobbing--
"Ooh! the stone, the great big stone! ooh! the stones on top!"
Naturally he wondered where the stone might be, and he looked again, and
there by the hedge bottom was a great flat stone, nigh buried in the
mools, and hid in the cotted grass and weeds. One of the stones was
called the "Strangers' Table." However, down he fell on his knee-bones
by that stone, and hearkened again. Clearer than ever, but tired and
spent with greeting came the little sobbing voice--"Ooh! ooh! the stone,
the stone on top." He was gey, and mis-liking to meddle with the thing,
but he couldn't stand the whimpering babby, and he tore like mad at the
stone, till he felt it lifting from the mools, and all at once it came
with a sough out o' the damp earth and the tangled grass and growing
things. And there in the hole lay a tiddy thing on its back, blinking up
at the moon and at him. 'T was no bigger than a year-old baby, but it
had long cotted hair and beard, twisted round and round its body so that
you couldn't see its clothes; and the hair was all yaller and shining
and silky, like a bairn's; but the face of it was old and as if 't were
hundreds of years since 't was young and smooth. Just a heap of
wrinkles, and two bright black eyne in the midst, set in a lot of
shining yaller hair; and the skin was the colour of the fresh turned
earth in the spring--brown as brown could be, and its bare hands and
feet were brown like the face of it. The greeting had stopped, but the
tears were standing on its cheek, and the tiddy thing looked mazed like
in the moonshine and the night air.
The creature's eyne got used like to the moonlight, and presently he
looked up in Tom's face as bold as ever was; "Tom," says he, "thou 'rt a
good lad!" as cool as thou can think, says he, "Tom, thou 'rt a good
lad!" and his voice was soft and high and piping like a little bird
twittering.
Tom touched his hat, and began to think what he ought to say. "Houts!"
says the thing again, "thou needn't be feared o' me; thou 'st done me a
better turn than thou know'st, my lad, and I'll do as much for thee."
Tom couldn't speak yet, but he thought; "Lord! for sure 't is a bogle!"
"No!" says he as quick as quick, "I am no bogle, but ye 'd best not ask
me what I be; anyways I be a good friend o' thine." Tom's very
knee-bones struck, for certainly an ordinary body couldn't have known
what he'd been thinking to himself, but he looked so kind like, and
spoke so fair, that he made bold to get out, a bit quavery like--
"Might I be axing to know your honour's name?"
"H'm," says he, pulling his beard; "as for that"--and he thought a
bit--"ay so," he went on at last, "Yallery Brown thou mayst call me,
Yallery Brown; 't is my nature seest thou, and as for a name 't will do
as any other. Yallery Brown, Tom, Yallery Brown's thy friend, my lad."
"Thankee, master," says Tom, quite meek like.
"And now," he says, "I'm in a hurry to-night, but tell me quick, what'll
I do for thee? Wilt have a wife? I can give thee the finest lass in the
town. Wilt be rich? I'll give thee gold as much as thou can carry. Or
wilt have help wi' thy work? Only say the word."
Tom scratched his head. "Well, as for a wife, I have no hankering after
such; they're but bothersome bodies, and I have women folk at home as
'll mend my clouts; and for gold that's as may be, but for work, there,
I can't abide work, and if thou 'lt give me a helpin' hand in it I'll
thank--"
"Stop," says he, quick as lightning, "I'll help thee and welcome, but if
ever thou sayest that to me--if ever thou thankest me, see'st thou, thou
'lt never see me more. Mind that now; I want no thanks, I'll have no
thanks;" and he stampt his tiddy foot on the earth and looked as wicked
as a raging bull.
"Mind that now, great lump that thou be," he went on, calming down a
bit, "and if ever thou need'st help, or get'st into trouble, call on me
and just say, 'Yallery Brown, come from the mools, I want thee!' and
I'll be wi' thee at once; and now," says he, picking a dandelion puff,
"good-night to thee," and he blowed it up, and it all came into Tom's
eyne and ears. Soon as Tom could see again the tiddy creature was gone,
and but for the stone on end and the hole at his feet, he'd have thought
he'd been dreaming.
Well, Tom went home and to bed; and by the morning he'd nigh forgot all
about it. But when he went to the work, there was none to do! all was
done already, the horses seen to, the stables cleaned out, everything in
its proper place, and he'd nothing to do but sit with his hands in his
pockets. And so it went on day after day, all the work done by Yallery
Brown, and better done, too, than he could have done it himself. And if
the master gave him more work, he sat down, and the work did itself, the
singeing irons, or the broom, or what not, set to, and with ne'er a hand
put to it would get through in no time. For he never saw Yallery Brown
in daylight; only in the darklins he saw him hopping about, like a
Will-o-th'-wyke without his lanthorn.
At first 't was mighty fine for Tom; he'd nought to do and good pay for
it; but by-and-by things began to grow vicey-varsy. If the work was done
for Tom, 't was undone for the other lads; if his buckets were filled,
theirs were upset; if his tools were sharpened, theirs were blunted and
spoiled; if his horses were clean as daisies, theirs were splashed with
muck, and so on; day in and day out, 't was the same. And the lads saw
Yallery Brown flitting about o' nights, and they saw the things working
without hands o' days, and they saw that Tom's work was done for him,
and theirs undone for them; and naturally they begun to look shy on him,
and they wouldn't speak or come nigh him, and they carried tales to the
master and so things went from bad to worse.
For Tom could do nothing himself; the brooms wouldn't stay in his hand,
the plough ran away from him, the hoe kept out of his grip. He thought
that he'd do his own work after all, so that Yallery Brown would leave
him and his neighbours alone. But he couldn't--true as death he
couldn't. He could only sit by and look on, and have the cold shoulder
turned on him, while the unnatural thing was meddling with the others,
and working for him.
At last, things got so bad that the master gave Tom the sack, and if he
hadn't, all the rest of the lads would have sacked him, for they swore
they'd not stay on the same garth with Tom. Well, naturally Tom felt
bad; 't was a very good place, and good pay too; and he was fair mad
with Yallery Brown, as 'd got him into such a trouble. So Tom shook his
fist in the air and called out as loud as he could, "Yallery Brown, come
from the mools; thou scamp, I want thee!"
You'll scarce believe it, but he'd hardly brought out the words but he
felt something tweaking his leg behind, while he jumped with the smart
of it; and soon as he looked down, there was the tiddy thing, with his
shining hair, and wrinkled face, and wicked glinting black eyne.
Tom was in a fine rage, and he would have liked to have kicked him, but
't was no good, there wasn't enough of it to get his boot against; but he
said, "Look here, master, I'll thank thee to leave me alone after this,
dost hear? I want none of thy help, and I'll have nought more to do with
thee--see now."
The horrid thing broke into a screeching laugh, and pointed its brown
finger at Tom. "Ho, ho, Tom!" says he. "Thou 'st thanked me, my lad, and
I told thee not, I told thee not!"
"I don't want thy help, I tell thee," Tom yelled at him--"I only want
never to see thee again, and to have nought more to do with 'ee--thou
can go."
The thing only laughed and screeched and mocked, as long as Tom went on
swearing, but so soon as his breath gave out--
"Tom, my lad," he said with a grin, "I'll tell 'ee summat, Tom. True's
true I'll never help thee again, and call as thou wilt, thou 'lt never
see me after to-day; but I never said that I'd leave thee alone, Tom,
and I never will, my lad! I was nice and safe under the stone, Tom, and
could do no harm; but thou let me out thyself, and thou can't put me
back again! I would have been thy friend and worked for thee if thou had
been wise; but since thou bee'st no more than a born fool I'll give 'ee
no more than a born fool's luck; and when all goes vicey-varsy, and
everything agee--thou 'lt mind that it's Yallery Brown's doing though
m'appen thou doesn't see him. Mark my words, will 'ee?"
And he began to sing, dancing round Tom, like a bairn with his yellow
hair, but looking older than ever with his grinning wrinkled bit of a
face:
             "Work as thou will
              Thou 'lt never do well;
              Work as thou mayst
              Thou 'lt never gain grist;
     For harm and mischance and Yallery Brown
     Thou 'st let out thyself from under the stone."
Tom could never rightly mind what he said next. 'T was all cussing and
calling down misfortune on him; but he was so mazed in fright that he
could only stand there shaking all over, and staring down at the horrid
thing; and if he'd gone on long, Tom would have tumbled down in a fit.
But by-and-by, his yaller shining hair rose up in the air, and wrapt
itself round him till he looked for all the world like a great dandelion
puff; and it floated away on the wind over the wall and out o' sight,
with a parting skirl of wicked voice and sneering laugh.
And did it come true, sayst thou? My word! but it did, sure as death! He
worked here and he worked there, and turned his hand to this and to
that, but it always went agee, and 't was all Yallery Brown's doing. And
the children died, and the crops rotted--the beasts never fatted, and
nothing ever did well with him; and till he was dead and buried, and
m'appen even afterwards, there was no end to Yallery Brown's spite at
him; day in and day out he used to hear him saying--
              "Work as thou wilt
               Thou 'lt never do well;
               Work as thou mayst
               Thou 'lt never gain grist;
Three Feathers
Once upon a time there was a girl who was married to a husband that she
never saw. And the way this was, was that he was only at home at night,
and would never have any light in the house. The girl thought that was
funny, and all her friends told her there must be something wrong with
her husband, some great deformity that made him want not to be seen.
Well, one night when he came home she suddenly lit a candle and saw him.
He was handsome enough to make all the women of the world fall in love
with him. But scarcely had she seen him when he began to change into a
bird, and then he said: "Now you have seen me, you shall see me no more,
unless you are willing to serve seven years and a day for me, so that I
may become a man once more." Then he told her to take three feathers
from under his side, and whatever she wished through them would come to
pass. Then he left her at a great house to be laundry-maid for seven
years and a day.
And the girl used to take the feathers and say:
"By virtue of my three feathers may the copper be lit, and the clothes
washed, and mangled, and folded, and put away to the missus's
satisfaction."
And then she had no more care about it. The feathers did the rest, and
the lady set great store by her for a better laundress she had never
had. Well, one day the butler, who had a notion to have the pretty
laundry-maid for his wife, said to her, he should have spoken before but
he did not want to vex her. "Why should it when I am but a
fellow-servant?" the girl said. And then he felt free to go on, and
explain he had £70 laid by with the master, and how would she like him
for a husband.
And the girl told him to fetch her the money, and he asked his master
for it, and brought it to her. But as they were going upstairs, she
cried, "O John, I must go back, sure I've left my shutters undone, and
they'll be slashing and banging all night."
The butler said, "Never you trouble, I'll put them right." and he ran
back, while she took her feathers, and said: "By virtue of my three
feathers may the shutters slash and bang till morning, and John not be
able to fasten them nor yet to get his fingers free from them."
And so it was. Try as he might the butler could not leave hold, nor yet
keep the shutters from blowing open as he closed them. And he was
angry, but could not help himself, and he did not care to tell of it and
get the laugh on him, so no one knew.
Then after a bit the coachman began to notice her, and she found he had
some £40 with the master, and he said she might have it if she would
take him with it.
So after the laundry-maid had his money in her apron as they went
merrily along, she stopt, exclaiming: "My clothes are left outside, I
must run back and bring them in." "Stop for me while I go; it is a cold
frost night," said William, "you'd be catching your death." So the girl
waited long enough to take her feathers out and say, "By virtue of my
three feathers may the clothes slash and blow about till morning, and
may William not be able to take his hand from them nor yet to gather
them up." And then she was away to bed and to sleep.
The coachman did not want to be every one's jest, and he said nothing.
So after a bit the footman comes to her and said he: "I have been with
my master for years and have saved up a good bit, and you have been
three years here, and must have saved up as well. Let us put it
together, and make us a home or else stay on at service as pleases you."
Well, she got him to bring the savings to her as the others had, and
then she pretended she was faint, and said to him: "James, I feel so
queer, run down cellar for me, that's a dear, and fetch me up a drop of
brandy." Now no sooner had he started than she said: "By virtue of my
three feathers may there be slashing and spilling, and James not be able
to pour the brandy straight nor yet to take his hand from it until
morning."
And so it was. Try as he might James could not get his glass filled, and
there was slashing and spilling, and right on it all, down came the
master to know what it meant!
So James told him he could not make it out, but he could not get the
drop of brandy the laundry-maid had asked for, and his hand would shake
and spill everything, and yet come away he could not.
This got him in for a regular scrape, and the master when he got back to
his wife said: "What has come over the men, they were all right until
that laundry-maid of yours came. Something is up now though. They have
all drawn out their pay, and yet they don't leave, and what can it be
anyway?"
But his wife said she could not hear of the laundry-maid being blamed,
for she was the best servant she had and worth all the rest put
together.
So it went on until one day as the girl stood in the hall door, the
coachman happened to say to the footman: "Do you know how that girl
served me, James?" And then William told about the clothes. The butler
put in, "That was nothing to what she served me," and he told of the
shutters clapping all night.
Just then the master came through the hall, and the girl said: "By
virtue of my three feathers may there be slashing and striving between
master and men, and may all get splashed in the pond."
And so it was, the men fell to disputing which had suffered the most by
her, and when the master came up all would be heard at once and none
listened to him, and it came to blows all round, and the first they knew
they had shoved one another into the pond.
When the girl thought they had had enough she took the spell off, and
the master asked her what had begun the row, for he had not heard in the
confusion.
And the girl said: "They were ready to fall on any one; they'd have beat
me if you had not come by."
So it blew over for that time, and through her feathers she made the
best laundress ever known. But to make a long story short, when the
seven years and a day were up, the bird-husband, who had known her
doings all along, came after her, restored to his own shape again. And
he told her mistress he had come to take her from being a servant, and
that she should have servants under her. But he did not tell of the
feathers.
And then he bade her give the men back their savings.
"That was a rare game you had with them," said he, "but now you are
going where there is plenty, leave them each their own." So she did; and
they drove off to their castle, where they lived happy ever after.
Sir Gammer Vans
Last Sunday morning at six o'clock in the evening as I was sailing over
the tops of the mountains in my little boat, I met two men on horseback
riding on one mare: So I asked them, "Could they tell me whether the
little old woman was dead yet who was hanged last Saturday week for
drowning herself in a shower of feathers?" They said they could not
positively inform me, but if I went to Sir Gammer Vans he could tell me
all about it. "But how am I to know the house?" said I. "Ho, 't is easy
enough," said they, "for 't is a brick house, built entirely of flints,
standing alone by itself in the middle of sixty or seventy others just
like it."
"Oh, nothing in the world is easier," said I.
"Nothing can be easier," said they: so I went on my way.
Now this Sir G. Vans was a giant, and a bottle-maker. And as all giants
who are bottle-makers usually pop out of a little thumb-bottle from
behind the door, so did Sir G. Vans.
"How d'ye do?" says he.
"Very well, I thank you," says I.
"Have some breakfast with me?"
"With all my heart," says I.
So he gave me a slice of beer, and a cup of cold veal; and there was a
little dog under the table that picked up all the crumbs.
"Hang him," says I.
"No, don't hang him," says he; "for he killed a hare yesterday. And if
you don't believe me, I'll show you the hare alive in a basket."
So he took me into his garden to show me the curiosities. In one corner
there was a fox hatching eagle's eggs; in another there was an iron
apple tree, entirely covered with pears and lead; in the third there was
the hare which the dog killed yesterday alive in the basket; and in the
fourth there were twenty-four hipper switches threshing tobacco, and
at the sight of me they threshed so hard that they drove the plug
through the wall, and through a little dog that was passing by on the
other side. I, hearing the dog howl, jumped over the wall; and turned it
as neatly inside out as possible, when it ran away as if it had not an
hour to live. Then he took me into the park to show me his deer: and I
remembered that I had a warrant in my pocket to shoot venison for his
majesty's dinner. So I set fire to my bow, poised my arrow, and shot
amongst them. I broke seventeen ribs on one side, and twenty-one and a
half on the other; but my arrow passed clean through without ever
touching it, and the worst was I lost my arrow: however, I found it
again in the hollow of a tree. I felt it; it felt clammy. I smelt it; it
smelt honey. "Oh, ho," said I, "here's a bee's nest," when out sprang a
covey of partridges. I shot at them; some say I killed eighteen; but I
am sure I killed thirty-six, besides a dead salmon which was flying over
the bridge, of which I made the best apple-pie I ever tasted.
Tom Hickathrift
Before the days of William the Conqueror there dwelt a man in the marsh
of the Isle of Ely whose name was Thomas Hickathrift, a poor day
labourer, but so stout that he could do two days' work in one. His one
son he called by his own name, Thomas Hickathrift, and he put him to
good learning, but the lad was none of the wisest, and indeed seemed to
be somewhat soft, so he got no good at all from his teaching.
Tom's father died, and his mother being tender of him, kept him as well
as she could. The slothful fellow would do nothing but sit in the
chimney-corner, and eat as much at a time as would serve four or five
ordinary men. And so much did he grow that when but ten years old he was
already eight feet high, and his hand like a shoulder of mutton.
One day his mother went to a rich farmer's house to beg a bottle of
straw for herself and Tom. "Take what you will," said the farmer, an
honest charitable man. So when she got home she told Tom to fetch the
straw, but he wouldn't and, beg as she might, he wouldn't till she
borrowed him a cart rope. So off he went, and when he came to the
farmer's, master and men were all a-trashing in the barn.
"I'm come for the straw," said Tom.
"Take as much as thou canst carry," said the farmer.
So Tom laid down his rope and began to make his bottle.
"Your rope is too short," said the farmer by way of a joke; but the joke
was on Tom's side, for when he had made up his load there was some
twenty hundred-weight of straw, and though they called him a fool for
thinking he could carry the tithe of it, he flung it over his shoulder
as if it had been a hundred-weight, to the great admiration of master
and men.
Tom's strength being thus made known there was no longer any basking by
the fire for him; every one would be hiring him to work, and telling
him 't was a shame to live such a lazy life. So Tom seeing them wait on
him as they did, went to work first with one, then with another. And one
day a woodman desired his help to bring home a tree. Off went Tom and
four men besides, and when they came to the tree they began to draw it
into the cart with pulleys. At last Tom, seeing them unable to lift it,
"Stand away, you fools," said he, and taking the tree, set it on one end
and laid it in the cart. "Now," said he, "see what a man can do."
"Marry, 't is true," said they, and the woodman asked what reward he'd
take. "Oh, a stick for my mother's fire," said Tom; and espying a tree
bigger than was in the cart, he laid it on his shoulders and went home
with it as fast as the cart and six horses could draw it.
Tom now saw that he had more strength than twenty men, and began to be
very merry, taking delight in company, in going to fairs and meetings,
in seeing sports and pastimes. And at cudgels, wrestling, or throwing
the hammer, not a man could stand against him, so that at last none
durst go into the ring to wrestle with him, and his fame was spread more
and more in the country.
Far and near he would go to any meetings, as football play or the like.
And one day in a part of the country where he was a stranger, and none
knew him, he stopped to watch the company at football play; rare sport
it was; but Tom spoiled it all, for meeting the ball he took it such a
kick that away it flew none could tell whither. They were angry with Tom
as you may fancy, but got nothing by that as Tom took hold of a big
spar, and laid about with a will, so that though the whole country-side
was up in arms against him, he cleared his way wherever he came.
It was late in the evening ere he could turn homeward, and on the road
there met him four lusty rogues that had been robbing passengers all
day. They thought they had a good prize in Tom, who was all alone, and
made cocksure of his money.
"Stand and deliver!" said they.
"What should I deliver?" said Tom.
"Your money, sirrah," said they.
"You shall give me better words for it first," said Tom.
"Come, come, no more prating; money we want, and money we'll have before
you stir."
"Is it so?" said Tom, "nay, then come and take it."
The long and the short of it was that Tom killed two of the rogues and
grieviously wounded the other two, and took all their money, which was
as much as two hundred pounds. And when he came home he made his old
mother laugh with the story of how he served the football players and
the four thieves.
But you shall see that Tom sometimes met his match. In wandering one day
in the forest he met a lusty tinker that had a good staff on his
shoulder, and a great dog to carry his bag and tools.
"Whence come you and whither are you going?" said Tom, "this is no
highway."
"What's that to you?" said the tinker; "fools must needs be meddling."
"I'll make you know," said Tom, "before you and I part, what it is to
"Well," said the tinker, "I'm ready for a bout with any man, and I hear
there is one Tom Hickathrift in the country of whom great things are
told. I'd fain see him to have a turn with him."
"Ay," said Tom, "methinks he might be master with you. Anyhow, I am the
man; what have you to say to me?"
"Why, verily, I'm glad we are so happily met."
"Sure, you do but jest," said Tom.
"Marry, I'm in earnest," said the tinker. "A match?" "'T is done." "Let
me first get a twig," said Tom. "Ay," said the tinker, "hang him that
would fight a man unarmed."
So Tom took a gate-rail for his staff, and at it they fell, the tinker
at Tom, and Tom at the tinker, like two giants they laid on at each
other. The tinker had a leathern coat on, and at every blow Tom gave the
tinker his coat roared again, yet the tinker did not give way one inch.
At last Tom gave him a blow on the side of his head which felled him.
"Now tinker where are you?" said Tom.
But the tinker being a nimble fellow, leapt up again, gave Tom a blow
that made him reel again, and followed his blow with one on the other
side that made Tom's neck crack again. So Tom flung down his weapon and
yielded the tinker the better on it, took him home to his house, where
they nursed their bruises and from that day forth there was no
stauncher pair of friends than they two.
Tom's fame was thus spread abroad till at length a brewer at Lynn,
wanting a good lusty man to carry his beer to Wisbeach went to hire Tom,
and promised him a new suit of clothes from top to toe, and that he
should eat and drink of the best, so Tom yielded to be his man and his
master told him what way he should go, for you must understand there was
a monstrous giant who kept part of the marsh-land, so that none durst go
that way.
So Tom went every day to Wisbeach a good twenty miles by the road. 'T
was a wearisome journey thought Tom and he soon found that the way kept
by the giant was nearer by half. Now Tom had got more strength than
ever, being well kept as he was and drinking so much strong ale as he
did. One day, then, as he was going to Wisbeach, without saying anything
to his master or any of his fellow servants, he resolved to take the
nearest road or to lose his life; as they say, to win horse or lose
saddle. Thus resolved, he took the near road, flinging open the gates
for his cart and horses to go through. At last the giant spied him, and
came up speedily, intending to take his beer for a prize.
He met Tom like a lion as though he would have swallowed him. "Who gave
you authority to come this way?" roared he. "I'll make you an example
for all rogues under the sun. See how many heads hang on yonder tree.
Yours shall hang higher than all the rest for a warning."
But Tom made him answer, "A fig in your teeth you shall not find me like
one of them, traitorly rogue that you are."
The giant took these words in high disdain, and ran into his cave to
fetch his great club, intending to dash out Tom's brains at the first
blow.
Tom knew not what to do for a weapon; his whip would be but little good
against a monstrous beast twelve foot in length and six foot about the
waist. But whilst the giant went for his club, bethinking him of a very
good weapon, he made no more ado, but took his cart, turned it upside
down, and took axle-tree and wheel for shield and buckler. And very good
weapons they were found!
Out came the giant and began to stare at Tom. "You are like to do great
service with those weapons," roared he. "I have here a twig that will
beat you and your wheel to the ground." Now this twig was as thick as
some mileposts are, but Tom was not daunted for all that, though the
giant made at him with such force that the wheel cracked again. But Tom
gave as good as he got, taking the giant such a weighty blow on the side
of the head that he reeled again. "What," said Tom, "are you drunk with
my strong beer already?"
So at it they went, Tom laying such huge blows at the giant, down whose
face sweat and blood ran together, so that, being fat and foggy and
tired with the long fighting, he asked Tom would he let him drink a
little? "Nay, nay," said Tom, "my mother did not teach me such wit;
who'd be a fool then?" And seeing the giant beginning to weary and fail
in his blows, Tom thought best to make hay whilst the sun shone, and,
laying on as fast as though he had been mad, he brought the giant to the
ground. In vain were the giant's roars and prayers and promises to yield
himself and be Tom's servant. Tom laid at him till he was dead, and
then, cutting off his head, he went into the cave, and found a great
store of silver and gold, which made his heart to leap. So he loaded his
cart, and after delivering his beer at Wisbeach, he came home and told
his master what had befallen him. And on the morrow he and his master
and more of the towns-folk of Lynn set out for the giant's cave. Tom
showed them the head, and what silver and gold there was in the cave,
and not a man but leapt for joy, for the giant was a great enemy to all
the country.
The news was spread all up and down the country-side how Tom Hickathrift
had killed the giant. And well was he that could run to see the cave;
all the folk made bonfires for joy, and if Tom was respected before, he
was much more so now. With common consent he took possession of the cave
and every one said, had it been twice as much, he would have deserved
it. So Tom pulled down the cave, and built himself a brave house. The
ground that the giant kept by force for himself, Tom gave part to the
poor for their common land, and part he turned into good wheat-land to
keep himself and his old mother, Jane Hickathrift. And now he was become
the chiefest man in the country-side; 't was no longer plain Tom, but
Mr. Hickathrift, and he was held in due respect I promise you. He kept
men and maids and lived most bravely; made him a park to keep deer, and
time passed with him happily in his great house till the end of his
days.
The Hedley Kow
There was once an old woman, who earned a poor living by going errands
and such like, for the farmers' wives round about the village where she
lived. It wasn't much she earned by it; but with a plate of meat at one
house, and a cup of tea at another, she made shift to get on somehow,
and always looked as cheerful as if she hadn't a want in the world.
Well, one summer evening as she was trotting away homewards, she came
upon a big black pot lying at the side of the road.
"Now that," said she, stopping to look at it, "would be just the very
thing for me if I had anything to put into it! But who can have left it
here?" and she looked round about, as if the person it belonged to must
be not far off. But she could see no one.
"Maybe it'll have a hole in it," she said thoughtfully:--
"Ay, that'll be how they've left it lying, hinny. But then it 'd do fine
to put a flower in for the window; I'm thinking I'll just take it home,
anyways." And she bent her stiff old back, and lifted the lid to look
inside.
"Mercy me!" she cried, and jumped back to the other side of the road;
"if it is fit brim full o' gold PIECES!!"
For a while she could do nothing but walk round and round her treasure,
admiring the yellow gold and wondering at her good luck, and saying to
herself about every two minutes, "Well, I do be feeling rich and
grand!" But presently she began to think how she could best take it home
with her; and she couldn't see any other way than by fastening one end
of her shawl to it, and so dragging it after her along the road.
"It'll certainly be soon dark," she said to herself, "and folk'll not
see what I'm bringing home with me, and so I'll have all the night to
myself to think what I'll do with it. I could buy a grand house and all,
and live like the Queen herself, and not do a stroke of work all day,
but just sit by the fire with a cup of tea; or maybe I'll give it to the
priest to keep for me, and get a piece as I'm wanting; or maybe I'll
just bury it in a hole at the garden-foot, and put a bit on the chimney,
between the chiney teapot and the spoons--for ornament like. Ah! I feel
so grand, I don't know myself rightly!"
And by this time, being already rather tired with dragging such a heavy
weight after her, she stopped to rest for a minute, turning to make sure
that her treasure was safe.
But when she looked at it, it wasn't a pot of gold at all, but a great
lump of shining silver!
She stared at it, and rubbed her eyes and stared at it again; but she
couldn't make it look like anything but a great lump of silver. "I'd
have sworn it was a pot of gold," she said at last, "but I reckon I must
have been dreaming. Ay, now, that's a change for the better; it'll be
far less trouble to look after, and none so easy stolen; yon gold pieces
would have been a sight of bother to keep 'em safe. Ay, I'm well quit of
them; and with my bonny lump I'm as rich as rich--!"
And she set off homewards again, cheerfully planning all the grand
things she was going to do with her money. It wasn't very long, however,
before she got tired again and stopped once more to rest for a minute or
two.
Again she turned to look at her treasure, and as soon as she set eyes on
it she cried out in astonishment. "Oh, my!" said she; "now it's a lump
o' iron! Well, that beats all; and it's just real convenient! I can sell
it as easy as easy, and get a lot o' penny pieces for it. Ay, hinny,
an' it's much handier than a lot o' yer gold and silver as 'd have kept
me from sleeping o' nights thinking the neighbours were robbing me--an'
it's a real good thing to have by you in a house, ye niver can tell what
ye mightn't use it for, an' it'll sell--ay, for a real lot. Rich? I'll
be just rolling!"
And on she trotted again chuckling to herself on her good luck, till
presently she glanced over her shoulder, "just to make sure it was there
still," as she said to herself.
"Eh, my!" she cried as soon as she saw it; "if it hasn't gone and turned
itself into a great stone this time! Now, how could it have known that I
was just terrible wanting something to hold my door open with? Ay, if
that isn't a good change! Hinny, it's a fine thing to have such good
luck."
And, all in a hurry to see how the stone would look in its corner by her
door, she trotted off down the hill, and stopped at the foot, beside her
own little gate.
When she had unlatched it, she turned to unfasten her shawl from the
stone, which this time seemed to lie unchanged and peaceably on the path
beside her, There was still plenty of light, and she could see the stone
quite plainly as she bent her stiff back over it, to untie the shawl
end; when, all of a sudden, it seemed to give a jump and a squeal, and
grew in a moment as big as a great horse; then it threw down four lanky
legs, and shook out two long ears, flourished a tail, and went off
kicking its feet into the and laughing like a naughty mocking boy.
The old woman stared after it, till it was fairly out of sight.
"WELL!" she said at last, "I do be the luckiest body hereabouts! Fancy
me seeing the Hedley Kow all to myself, and making so free with it too!
I can tell you, I do feel that GRAND--"
And she went into her cottage, and sat down by the fire to think over
her good luck.
Gobborn Seer
Once there was a man Gobborn Seer, and he had a son called Jack.
One day he sent him out to sell a sheep skin, and Gobborn said, "You
must bring me back the skin and the value of it as well."
So Jack started, but he could not find any who would leave him the skin
and give him its price too. So he came home discouraged.
But Gobborn Seer said, "Never mind, you must take another turn at it
to-morrow."
So he tried again, and nobody wished to buy the skin on those terms.
When he came home his father said, "You must go and try your luck
to-morrow," and the third day it seemed as if it would be the same thing
over again. And he had half a mind not to go back at all, his father
would be so vexed. As he came to a bridge, like the Creek Road one
yonder, he leaned on the parapet thinking of his trouble, and that
perhaps it would be foolish to run away from home, but he could not tell
which to do; when he saw a girl washing her clothes on the bank below.
She looked up and said:
"If it may be no offence asking, what is it you feel so badly about?"
"My father has given me this skin, and I am to fetch it back and the
price of it beside."
"Is that all? Give it here, and it's easy done."
So the girl washed the skin in the stream, took the wool from it, and
paid him the value of it, and gave him the skin to carry back.
His father was well pleased, and said to Jack, "That was a witty woman;
she would make you a good wife. Do you think you could tell her again?"
Jack thought he could, so his father told him to go by-and-by to the
bridge, and see if she was there, and if so bid her come home to take
tea with them.
And sure enough Jack spied her and told her how his old father had a
wish to meet her, and would she be pleased to drink tea with them.
The girl thanked him kindly, and said she could come the next day; she
was too busy at the moment.
"All the better," said Jack, "I'll have time to make ready."
So when she came Gobborn Seer could see she was a witty woman, and he
asked her if she would marry his Jack. She said "Yes," and they were
married.
Not long after, Jack's father told him he must come with him and build
the finest castle that ever was seen, for a king who wished to outdo all
others by his wonderful castle.
And as they went to lay the foundation-stone, Gobborn Seer said to Jack,
"Can't you shorten the way for me?"
But Jack looked ahead and there was a long road before them, and he
said, "I don't see, father, how I could break a bit off."
"You're no good to me, then, and had best be off home."
So poor Jack turned back, and when he came in his wife said, "Why, how's
this you've come alone?" and he told her what his father had said and
his answer.
"You stupid," said his witty wife, "if you had told a tale you would
have shortened the road! Now listen till I tell you a story, and then
catch up with Gobborn Seer and begin it at once. He will like hearing
it, and by the time you are done you will have reached the
foundation-stone."
So Jack sweated and overtook his father. Gobborn Seer said never a word,
but Jack began his story, and the road was shortened as his wife had
said.
When they came to the end of their journey, they started building of
this castle which was to outshine all others. Now the wife had advised
them to be intimate with the servants, and so they did as she said, and
it was "Good-morning" and "Good-day to you" as they passed in and out.
Now, at the end of a twelvemonth, Gobborn, the wise man, had built such
a castle thousands were gathered to admire it.
And the king said: "The castle is done. I shall return to-morrow and pay
you all."
"I have just a ceiling to finish in an upper lobby," said Gobborn, "and
then it wants nothing."
But after the king was gone off, the housekeeper sent for Gobborn and
Jack, and told them that she had watched for a chance to warn them, for
the king was so afraid they should carry their art away and build some
other king as fine a castle, he meant to take their lives on the morrow.
Gobborn told Jack to keep a good heart, and they would come off all
right.
When the king had come back Gobborn told him he had been unable to
complete the job for lack of a tool left at home, and he should like to
send Jack after it.
"No, no," said the king, "cannot one of the men do the errand?"
"No, they could not make themselves understood," said the Seer, "but
Jack could do the errand."
"You and your son are to stop here. But how will it do if I send my own
son?"
"That will do."
So Gobborn sent by him a message to Jack's wife. "Give him Crooked and
Straight!"
Now there was a little hole in the wall rather high up, and Jack's wife
tried to reach up into a chest there after "crooked and straight," but
at last she asked the king's son to help her, because his arms were
longest.
But when he was leaning over the chest she caught him by the two heels,
and threw him into the chest, and fastened it down. So there he was,
both "crooked and straight!"
Then he begged for pen and ink, which she brought him, but he was not
allowed out, and holes were bored that he might breathe.
When his letter came, telling the king, his father, he was to be let
free when Gobborn and Jack were safe home, the king saw he must settle
for the building, and let them come away.
As they left Gobborn told him: Now that Jack was done with this work, he
should soon build a castle for his witty wife far superior to the
king's, which he did, and they lived there happily ever after.
Lawkamercyme
     There was an old woman, as I've heard tell.
     She went to the market her eggs for to sell;
     She went to the market, all on a market-day,
     And she fell asleep on the king's highway.
     There came by a pedlar, whose name was Stout,
     He cut her petticoats round about;
     He cut her petticoats up to the knees,
     Which made the old woman to shiver and freeze.
     When this old woman first did wake,
     She began to shiver, and she began to shake;
     She began to wonder, and she began to cry--
     "Lawkamercyme, this is none of I!"
     "But if it be I, as I do hope it be,
     I've a little dog at home, and he'll know me;
     If it be I, he'll wag his little tail,
     And if it be not I, he'll loudly bark and wail."
     Home went the little woman, all in the dark;
     Up got the little dog, and he began to bark;
     He began to bark, so she began to cry--
Tattercoats
In a great Palace by the sea there once dwelt a very rich old lord, who
had neither wife nor children living, only one little granddaughter,
whose face he had never seen in all her life. He hated her bitterly,
because at her birth his favourite daughter died; and when the old nurse
brought him the baby, he swore, that it might live or die as it liked,
but he would never look on its face as long as it lived.
So he turned his back, and sat by his window looking out over the sea,
and weeping great tears for his lost daughter, till his white hair and
beard grew down over his shoulders and twined round his chair and crept
into the chinks of the floor, and his tears, dropping on to the
window-ledge, wore a channel through the stone, and ran away in a little
river to the great sea. And, meanwhile, his granddaughter grew up with
no one to care for her, or clothe her; only the old nurse, when no one
was by, would sometimes give her a dish of scraps from the kitchen, or a
torn petticoat from the rag-bag; while the other servants of the Palace
would drive her from the house with blows and mocking words, calling
her "Tattercoats," and pointing at her bare feet and shoulders, till she
ran away crying, to hide among the bushes.
And so she grew up, with little to eat or wear, spending her days in the
fields and lanes, with only the gooseherd for a companion, who would
play to her so merrily on his little pipe, when she was hungry, or cold,
or tired, that she forgot all her troubles, and fell to dancing, with
his flock of noisy geese for partners.
But, one day, people told each other that the King was travelling
through the land, and in the town near by was to give a great ball, to
all the lords and ladies of the country, when the Prince, his only son,
was to choose a wife.
One of the royal invitations was brought to the Palace by the sea, and
the servants carried it up to the old lord who still sat by his window,
wrapped in his long white hair and weeping into the little river that
was fed by his tears.
But when he heard the King's command, he dried his eyes and bade them
bring shears to cut him loose, for his hair had bound him a fast
prisoner and he could not move. And then he sent them for rich clothes,
and jewels, which he put on; and he ordered them to saddle the white
horse, with gold and silk, that he might ride to meet the King.
Meanwhile Tattercoats had heard of the great doings in the town, and she
sat by the kitchen-door weeping because she could not go to see them.
And when the old nurse heard her crying she went to the Lord of the
Palace, and begged him to take his granddaughter with him to the King's
ball.
But he only frowned and told her to be silent, while the servants
laughed and said: "Tattercoats is happy in her rags, playing with the
gooseherd, let her be--it is all she is fit for."
A second, and then a third time, the old nurse begged him to let the
girl go with him, but she was answered only by black looks and fierce
words, till she was driven from the room by the jeering servants, with
blows and mocking words.
Weeping over her ill-success, the old nurse went to look for
Tattercoats; but the girl had been turned from the door by the cook, and
had run away to tell her friend the gooseherd, how unhappy she was
because she could not go to the King's ball.
But when the gooseherd had listened to her story, he bade her cheer up,
and proposed that they should go together into the town to see the King,
and all the fine things; and when she looked sorrowfully down at her
rags and bare feet, he played a note or two upon his pipe, so gay and
merry, that she forgot all about her tears and her troubles, and before
she well knew, the herdboy had taken her by the hand, and she, and he,
and the geese before them, were dancing down the road towards the town.
Before they had gone very far, a handsome young man, splendidly dressed,
rode up and stopped to ask the way to the castle where the King was
staying; and when he found that they too were going thither, he got off
his horse and walked beside them along the road.
The herdboy pulled out his pipe and played a low sweet tune, and the
stranger looked again and again at Tattercoats' lovely face till he fell
deeply in love with her, and begged her to marry him.
But she only laughed, and shook her golden head.
"You would be finely put to shame if you had a goosegirl for your wife!"
said she; "go and ask one of the great ladies you will see to-night at
the King's ball, and do not flout poor Tattercoats."
But the more she refused him the sweeter the pipe played, and the deeper
the young man fell in love; till at last he begged her, as a proof of
his sincerity, to come that night at twelve to the King's ball, just as
she was, with the herdboy and his geese, and in her torn petticoat and
bare feet, and he would dance with her before the King and the lords and
ladies, and present her to them all, as his dear and honoured bride.
So when night came, and the hall in the castle was full of light and
music, and the lords and ladies were dancing before the King, just as
the clock struck twelve, Tattercoats and the herdboy, followed by his
flock of noisy geese, entered at the great doors, and walked straight up
the ball-room, while on either side the ladies whispered, the lords
laughed, and the King seated at the far end stared in amazement.
But as they came in front of the throne, Tattercoats' lover rose from
beside the King, and came to meet her. Taking her by the hand, he kissed
her thrice before them all, and turned to the King.
[Illustration: TATTERCOATS.]
"Father!" he said, for it was the Prince himself, "I have made my
choice, and here is my bride, the loveliest girl in all the land, and
the sweetest as well!"
Before he had finished speaking, the herdboy put his pipe to his lips
and played a few low notes that sounded like a bird singing far off in
the woods; and as he played, Tattercoats' rags were changed to shining
robes sewn with glittering jewels, a golden crown lay upon her golden
hair, and the flock of geese behind her, became a crowd of dainty pages,
bearing her long train.
And as the King rose to greet her as his daughter, the trumpets sounded
loudly in honour of the new Princess, and the people outside in the
street said to each other:
"Ah! now the Prince has chosen for his wife the loveliest girl in all
the land!"
But the gooseherd was never seen again, and no one knew what became of
him; while the old lord went home once more to his Palace by the sea,
for he could not stay at Court, when he had sworn never to look on his
granddaughter's face.
So there he still sits by his window, if you could only see him, as you
some day may, weeping more bitterly than ever, as he looks out over the
sea.
The Wee Bannock
     "Grannie, grannie, come tell us the story of the wee bannock."
     "Hout, childer, ye've heard it a hundred times afore. I needn't
     tell it over again."
     "Ah! but, grannie, it's such a fine one. You must tell it. Just
     once."
     "Well, well, if ye'll all promise to be good, I'll tell it ye
     again."
There lived an old man and an old woman at the side of a burn. They had
two cows, five hens, and a cock, a cat and two kittens. The old man
looked after the cows, and the old wife span on the distaff. The kittens
oft gripped at the old wife's spindle, as it tussled over the
hearthstone. "Sho, sho," she would say, "go away;" and so it tussled
about.
One day, after breakfast, she thought she would have a bannock. So she
baked two oatmeal bannocks, and set them on to the fire to harden. After
a while, the old man came in, and sat down beside the fire, and takes
one of the bannocks, and snaps it through the middle. When the other one
sees this, it runs off as fast as it could, and the old wife after it,
with the spindle in the one hand, and the distaff in the other. But the
wee bannock ran away and out of sight, and ran till it came to a pretty
large thatched house, and it ran boldly up inside to the fireside; and
there were three tailors sitting on a big bench. When they saw the wee
bannock come in, they jumped up, and got behind the goodwife, that was
carding tow by the fire. "Hout," quoth she, "be no afeard; it's but a
wee bannock. Grip it, and I'll give ye a sup of milk with it." Up she
gets with the tow-cards and the tailor with the goose, and the two
'prentices, the one with the big shears, and the other with the lawbrod;
but it dodged them, and ran round about the fire; and one of the
'prentices, thinking to snap it with the shears, fell into the ashes.
The tailor cast the goose, and the goodwife the tow-cards; but it
wouldn't do. The bannock ran away, and ran till it came to a wee house
at the roadside; and in it runs and there was a weaver sitting at the
loom, and the wife winding a clue of yarn.
"Tibby," quoth he, "what's that?"
"Oh," quoth she, "it's a wee bannock."
"It's well come," quoth he, "for our porrage were but thin to-day. Grip
it, my woman; grip it."
"Ay," quoth she; "what recks! That's a clever bannock. Catch it, Willie;
catch it, man."
"Hout," quoth Willie, "cast the clue at it."
But the bannock dodged round about, and off it went, and over the hill,
like a new-tarred sheep or a mad cow. And forward it runs to the
neat-house, to the fireside; and there was the goodwife churning.
"Come away, wee bannock," quoth she; "I'll have cream and bread to-day."
But the wee bannock dodged round about the churn, and the wife after it,
and in the hurry she had near-hand overturned the churn. And before she
got it set right again, the wee bannock was off and down the brae to the
mill; and in it ran.
The miller was sifting meal in the trough; but, looking up: "Ay," quoth
he, "it's a sign of plenty when ye're running about, and nobody to look
after ye. But I like a bannock and cheese. Come your way hither, and
I'll give ye a night's quarters." But the bannock wouldn't trust itself
with the miller and his cheese. So it turned and ran its way out; but
the miller didn't fash his head with it.
So it toddled away and ran till it came to the smithy; and in it runs,
and up to the anvil. The smith was making horse-nails. Quoth he: "I like
a glass of good ale and a well-toasted bannock. Come your way in by
here." But the bannock was frightened when it heard about the ale, and
turned and was off as hard as it could, and the smith after it, and cast
the hammer. But it missed, and the bannock was out of sight in a crack,
and ran till it came to a farmhouse with a good peat-stack at the end of
it. Inside it runs to the fireside. The goodman was cloving lint, and
the goodwife heckling. "O Janet," quoth he, "there's a wee bannock; I'll
have the half of it."
"Well, John, I'll have the other half. Hit it over the back with the
clove." But the bannock played dodgings. "Hout, tout," quoth the wife,
and made the heckle flee at it. But it was too clever for her.
And off and up the burn it ran to the next house, and rolled its way to
the fireside. The goodwife was stirring the soup, and the goodman
plaiting sprit-binnings for the cows. "Ho, Jock," quoth the goodwife,
"here come. You're always crying about a wee bannock. Here's one. Come
in, haste ye, and I'll help ye to grip it."
"Ay, mother, where is it?"
"See there. Run over on that side."
But the bannock ran in behind the goodman's chair. Jock fell among the
sprits. The goodman cast a binning, and the goodwife the spurtle. But it
was too clever for Jock and her both. It was off and out of sight in a
crack, and through among the whins, and down the road to the next house,
and in and snug by the fireside. The folk were just sitting down to
their soup, and the goodwife scraping the pot. "Look," quoth she,
"there's a wee bannock come in to warm itself at our fireside."
"Shut the door," quoth the goodman, "and we'll try to get a grip of it."
When the bannock heard that, it ran out of the house and they after it
with their spoons, and the goodman shied his hat. But it rolled away and
ran, and ran, till it came to another house; and when it went in the
folk were just going to their beds. The goodman was taking off his
breeches, and the goodwife raking the fire.
"What's that?" quoth he.
Quoth he, "I could eat the half of it."
"Grip it," quoth the wife, "and I'll have a bit too."
"Cast your breeches at it!" The goodman shied his breeches, and had
nearly smothered it. But it wriggled out and ran, and the goodman after
it without his breeches; and there was a clean chase over the craft
park, and in among the whins; and the goodman lost it, and had to come
away, trotting home half naked. But now it was grown dark, and the wee
bannock couldn't see; but it went into the side of a big whin bush, and
into a fox's hole. The fox had had no meat for two days. "O welcome,
welcome," quoth the fox, and snapped it in two in the middle. And that
was the end of the wee bannock.
Johnny Gloke
Johnny Gloke was a tailor by trade, but like a man of spirit he grew
tired of his tailoring, and wished to follow some other path that would
lead to honour and fame. But he did not know what to do at first to gain
fame and fortune, so for a time he was fonder of basking idly in the sun
than in plying the needle and scissors. One warm day as he was enjoying
his ease, he was annoyed by the flies alighting on his bare ankles. He
brought his hand down on them with force and killed a goodly number of
them. On counting the victims of his valour, he was overjoyed at his
success; his heart rose to the doing of great deeds, and he gave vent to
his feelings in the saying:--
     "Well done! Johnny Gloke,
      Kilt fifty flies at one stroke."
His resolution was now taken to cut out his path to fortune and honour.
So he took down from its resting-place a rusty old sword that had
belonged to some of his forebears, and set out in search of adventures.
After travelling a long way, he came to a country that was much troubled
by two giants, whom no one was bold enough to meet, and strong enough to
overcome. He was soon told of the giants, and learned that the King of
the country had offered a great reward and the hand of his daughter in
marriage to the man who should rid his land of this scourge. John's
heart rose to the deed, and he offered himself for the service. The
great haunt of the giants was a wood, and John set out with his old
sword to perform his task. When he reached the wood, he laid himself
down to think what course he would follow, for he knew how weak he was
compared to those he had undertaken to kill. He had not waited long,
when he saw them coming with a waggon to fetch wood for fuel. My! they
were big ones, with huge heads and long tusks for teeth. Johnny hid
himself in the hollow of a tree, thinking only of his own safety.
Feeling himself safe, he peeped out of his hiding-place, and watched the
two at work. Thus watching he formed his plan of action. He picked up a
pebble, threw it with force at one of them, and struck him a sharp blow
on the head. The giant in his pain turned at once on his companion, and
blamed him in strong words for hitting him. The other denied in anger
that he had thrown the pebble. John now saw himself on the high way to
gain his reward and the hand of the King's daughter. He kept still, and
carefully watched for an opportunity of striking another blow. He soon
found it, and right against the giant's head went another pebble. The
injured giant fell on his companion in fury, and the two belaboured each
other till they were utterly tired out. They sat down on a log to
breathe, rest, and recover themselves.
While sitting, one of them said, "Well, all the King's army was not able
to take us, but I fear an old woman with a rope's end would be too much
for us now."
"If that be so," said Johnny Gloke, as he sprang, bold as a lion, from
his hiding-place, "What do you say to Johnny Gloke with his old roosty
sword?" So saying he fell upon them, cut off their heads, and returned
in triumph. He received the King's daughter in marriage and for a time
lived in peace and happiness. He never told the mode he followed in his
dealing with the giants.
Some time after a rebellion broke out among the subjects of his
father-in-law. John, on the strength of his former valiant deed, was
chosen to quell the rebellion. His heart sank within him, but he could
not refuse, and so lose his great name. He was mounted on the fiercest
horse that ever saw sun or wind, and set out on his desperate task. He
was not accustomed to ride on horseback, and he soon lost all control of
his steed. It galloped off at full speed, in the direction of the rebel
army. In its wild career it passed under the gallows that stood by the
wayside. The gallows was somewhat old and frail, and down it fell on the
horse's neck. Still the horse made no stop, but always forward at
furious speed towards the rebels. On seeing this strange sight
approaching towards them at such a speed they were seized with terror,
and cried out to one another, "There comes Johnny Gloke that killed the
two giants with the gallows on his horse's neck to hang us all." They
broke their ranks, fled in dismay, and never stopped till they reached
their homes. Thus was Johnny Gloke a second time victorious. So in due
time he came to the throne and lived a long, happy, and good life as
king.
Coat o' Clay
Once on a time, in the parts of Lindsey, there lived a wise woman. Some
said she was a witch, but they said it in a whisper, lest she should
overhear and do them a mischief, and truly it was not a thing one could
be sure of, for she was never known to hurt any one, which, if she were
a witch, she would have been sure to do. But she could tell you what
your sickness was, and how to cure it with herbs, and she could mix rare
possets that would drive the pain out of you in a twinkling; and she
could advise you what to do if your cows were ill, or if you'd got into
trouble, and tell the maids whether their sweethearts were likely to be
faithful.
But she was ill-pleased if folks questioned her too much or too long,
and she sore misliked fools. A many came to her asking foolish things,
as was their nature, and to them she never gave counsel--at least of a
kind that could aid them much.
Well, one day, as she sat at her door paring potatoes, over the stile
and up the path came a tall lad with a long nose and goggle eyes and his
hands in his pockets.
"That's a fool, if ever was one, and a fool's luck in his face," said
the wise woman to herself with a nod of her head, and threw a potato
skin over her left shoulder to keep off ill-chance.
"Good-day, missis," said the fool. "I be come to see thee."
"So thou art," said the wise woman; "I see that. How's all in thy folk
this year?"
"Oh, fairly," answered he. "But they say I be a fool."
"Ay, so thou art," nodded she, and threw away a bad potato. "I see that
too. But wouldst o' me? I keep no brains for sale."
"Well, see now. Mother says I'll ne'er be wiser all my born days; but
folks tell us thou canst do everything. Can't thee teach me a bit, so
they'll think me a clever fellow at home?"
"Hout-tout!" said the wise woman; "thou 'rt a bigger fool than I
thought. Nay, I can't teach thee nought, lad; but I tell thee summat.
Thou 'lt be a fool all thy days till thou gets a coat o' clay; and then
thou 'lt know more than me."
"Hi, missis; what sort of a coat's that?" said he.
"That's none o' my business," answered she, "Thou 'st got to find out
that."
And she took up her potatoes and went into her house.
The fool took off his cap and scratched his head.
"It's a queer kind of coat to look for, sure-ly," said he, "I never
heard of a coat o' clay. But then I be a fool, that's true."
So he walked on till he came to the drain near by, with just a pickle of
water and a foot of mud in it.
"Here's muck," said the fool, much pleased, and he got in and rolled in
it spluttering. "Hi, yi!" said he--for he had his mouth full--"I've got
a coat o' clay now to be sure. I'll go home and tell my mother I'm a
wise man and not a fool any longer." And he went on home.
Presently he came to a cottage with a lass at the door.
"Morning, fool," said she; "hast thou been ducked in the horse-pond?"
"Fool yourself," said he, "the wise woman says I'll know more 'n she
when I get a coat o' clay, and here it is. Shall I marry thee, lass?"
"Ay," said she, for she thought she'd like a fool for a husband, "when
shall it be?"
"I'll come and fetch thee when I've told my mother," said the fool, and
he gave her his lucky penny and went on.
When he got home his mother was on the doorstep.
"Mother, I 've got a coat o' clay," said he.
"Coat o' muck," said she; "and what of that?"
"Wise woman said I'd know more than she when I got a coat o' clay," said
he, "so I down in the drain and got one, and I'm not a fool any longer."
"Very good," said his mother, "now thou canst get a wife."
"Ay," said he, "I'm going to marry so-an'-so."
"What!" said his mother, "that lass? No, and that thou 'lt not. She's
nought but a brat, with ne'er a cow or a cabbage o' her own."
"But I gave her my luck penny," said the fool.
"Then thou 'rt a bigger fool than ever, for all thy coat o' clay!" said
his mother, and banged the door in his face.
"Dang it!" said the fool, and scratched his head, "that's not the right
sort o' clay sure-ly."
So back he went to the highroad and sat down on the bank of the river
close by, looking at the water, which was cool and clear.
By-and-by he fell asleep, and before he knew what he was
about--plump--he rolled off into the river with a splash, and scrambled
out, dripping like a drowned rat.
"Dear, dear," said he, "I'd better go and get dry in the sun." So up he
went to the highroad, and lay down in the dust, rolling about so that
the sun should get at him all over.
Presently, when he sat up and looked down at himself, he found that the
dust had caked into a sort of skin over his wet clothes till you could
not see an inch of them, they were so well covered. "Hi, yi!" said he,
"here's a coat o' clay ready made, and a fine one. See now, I'm a clever
fellow this time sure-ly, for I've found what I wanted without looking
for it! Wow, but it's a fine feeling to be so smart!"
And he sat and scratched his head, and thought about his own cleverness.
But all of a sudden, round the corner came the squire on horseback, full
gallop, as if the boggles were after him; but the fool had to jump,
even though the squire pulled his horse back on his haunches.
"What the dickens," said the squire, "do you mean by lying in the middle
of the road like that?"
"Well, master," said the fool, "I fell into the water and got wet, so I
lay down in the road to get dry; and I lay down a fool an' got up a wise
man."
"How's that?" said the squire.
So the fool told him about the wise woman and the coat o' clay.
"Ah, ah!" laughed the squire, "whoever heard of a wise man lying in the
middle of the highroad to be ridden over? Lad, take my word for it, you
are a bigger fool than ever," and he rode on laughing.
"Dang it!" said the fool, as he scratched his head. "I've not got the
right sort of coat yet, then." And he choked and spluttered in the dust
that the squire's horse had raised.
So on he went in a melancholy mood till he came to an inn, and the
landlord at his door smoking.
"Well, fool," said he, "thou 'rt fine and dirty."
"Ay," said the fool, "I be dirty outside an' dusty in, but it's not the
right thing yet."
And he told the landlord all about the wise woman and the coat o' clay.
"Hout-tout!" said the landlord, with a wink. "I know what's wrong. Thou
'st got a skin o' dirt outside and all dry dust inside. Thou must
moisten it, lad, with a good drink, and then thou 'lt have a real
all-over coat o' clay."
"Hi," said the fool, "that's a good word."
So down he sat and began to drink. But it was wonderful how much liquor
it took to moisten so much dust; and each time he got to the bottom of
the pot he found he was still dry. At last he began to feel very merry
and pleased with himself.
"Hi, yi!" said he. "I've got a real coat o' clay now outside and
in--what a difference it do make, to be sure. I feel another man now--so
smart."
And he told the landlord he was certainly a wise man now, though he
couldn't speak over-distinctly after drinking so much. So up he got, and
thought he would go home and tell his mother she hadn't a fool for a son
any more.
But just as he was trying to get through the inn-door which would
scarcely keep still long enough for him to find it, up came the landlord
and caught him by the sleeve.
"See here, master," said he, "thou hasn't paid for thy score--where's
thy money?"
"Haven't any!" said the fool, and pulled out his pockets to show they
were empty.
"What!" said the landlord, and swore; "thou 'st drunk all my liquor and
haven't got nought to pay for it with!"
"Hi!" said the fool. "You told me to drink so as to get a coat o' clay;
but as I'm a wise man now I don't mind helping thee along in the world
a bit, for though I'm a smart fellow I'm not too proud to my friends."
"Wise man! smart fellow!" said the landlord, "and help me along, wilt
thee? Dang it! thou 'rt the biggest fool I ever saw, and it's I'll help
thee first--out o' this!"
And he kicked him out of the door into the road and swore at him.
"Hum," said the fool, as he lay in the dust, "I'm not so wise as I
thought. I guess I'll go back to the wise woman and tell her there's a
screw loose somewhere."
So up he got and went along to her house, and found her sitting at the
door.
"So thou 'rt come back," said she, with a nod. "What dost thou want with
me now?"
So he sat down and told her how he'd tried to get a coat o' clay, and he
wasn't any wiser for all of it.
"No," said the wise woman, "thou 'rt a bigger fool than ever, my lad."
"So they all say," sighed the fool; "but where can I get the right sort
of coat o' clay, then, missis?"
"When thou 'rt done with this world, and thy folk put thee in the
ground," said the wise woman. "That's the only coat o' clay as 'll make
such as thee wise, lad. Born a fool, die a fool, and be a fool thy
life long, and that's the truth!"
And she went into the house and shut the door.
"Dang it," said the fool. "I must tell my mother she was right after
all, and that she'll never have a wise man for a son!"
And he went off home.
The Three Cows
There was a farmer, and he had three cows, fine fat beauties they were.
One was called Facey, the other Diamond, and the third Beauty. One
morning he went into his cowshed, and there he found Facey so thin that
the wind would have blown her away. Her skin hung loose about her, all
her flesh was gone, and she stared out of her great eyes as though she'd
seen a ghost; and what was more, the fireplace in the kitchen was one
great pile of wood-ash. Well, he was bothered with it; he could not see
how all this had come about.
Next morning his wife went out to the shed, and see! Diamond was for all
the world as wisht a looking creature as Facey--nothing but a bag of
bones, all the flesh gone, and half a rick of wood was gone too; but the
fireplace was piled up three feet high with white wood-ashes. The farmer
determined to watch the third night; so he hid in a closet which opened
out of the parlour, and he left the door just ajar, that he might see
what passed.
Tick, tick, went the clock, and the farmer was nearly tired of waiting;
he had to bite his little finger to keep himself awake, when suddenly
the door of his house flew open, and in rushed maybe a thousand pixies,
laughing and dancing and dragging at Beauty's halter till they had
brought the cow into the middle of the room. The farmer really thought
he should have died with fright, and so perhaps he would had not
curiosity kept him alive.
Tick, tick, went the clock, but he did not hear it now. He was too
intent staring at the pixies and his last beautiful cow. He saw them
throw her down, fall on her, and kill her; then with their knives they
ripped her open, and flayed her as clean as a whistle. Then out ran some
of the little people and brought in firewood and made a roaring blaze on
the hearth, and there they cooked the flesh of the cow--they baked and
they boiled, they stewed and they fried.
"Take care," cried one, who seemed to be the king, "let no bone be
broken."
Well, when they had all eaten, and had devoured every scrap of beef on
the cow, they began playing games with the bones, tossing them one to
another. One little leg-bone fell close to the closet door, and the
farmer was so afraid lest the pixies should come there and find him in
their search for the bone, that he put out his hand and drew it in to
him. Then he saw the king stand on the table and say, "Gather the
bones!"
Round and round flew the imps, picking up the bones. "Arrange them,"
said the king; and they placed them all in their proper positions in the
hide of the cow. Then they folded the skin over them, and the king
struck the heap of bone and skin with his rod. Whisht! up sprang the cow
and lowed dismally. It was alive again; but, alas! as the pixies dragged
it back to its stall, it halted in the off forefoot, for a bone was
missing.
     "The cock crew,
      Away they flew."
and the farmer crept trembling to bed.
The Blinded Giant
At Dalton, near Thirsk, in Yorkshire, there is a mill. It has quite
recently been rebuilt; but when I was at Dalton, six years ago, the old
building stood. In front of the house was a long mound which went by the
name of "the giant's grave," and in the mill you can see a long blade of
iron something like a scythe-blade, but not curved, which was called
"the giant's knife," because of a very curious story which is told of
this knife. Would you like to hear it? Well, it isn't very long.
There once lived a giant at this mill who had only one eye in the middle
of his forehead, and he ground men's bones to make his bread. One day he
captured on Pilmoor a lad named Jack, and instead of grinding him in the
mill he kept him grinding as his servant, and never let him get away.
Jack served the giant seven years, and never was allowed a holiday the
whole time. At last he could bear it no longer. Topcliffe fair was
coming on, and Jack begged that he might be allowed to go there.
"No, no," said the giant, "stop at home and mind your grinding."
"I've been grinding and grinding these seven years," said Jack, "and not
a holiday have I had. I'll have one now, whatever you say."
"We'll see about that," said the giant.
Well, the day was hot, and after dinner the giant lay down in the mill
with his head on a sack and dozed. He had been eating in the mill, and
had laid down a great loaf of bone bread by his side, and the knife I
told you about was in his hand, but his fingers relaxed their hold of it
in sleep. Jack seized the knife, and holding it with both his hands
drove the blade into the single eye of the giant, who woke with a howl
of agony, and starting up, barred the door. Jack was again in
difficulties, for he couldn't get out, but he soon found a way out of
them. The giant had a favourite dog, which had also been sleeping when
his master was blinded. So Jack killed the dog, skinned it, and threw
the hide over his back.
"Bow, wow," says Jack.
"At him, Truncheon," said the giant; "at the little wretch that I've fed
these seven years, and now has blinded me."
"Bow, wow," says Jack, and ran between the giant's legs on all-fours,
barking till he got to the door. He unlatched it and was off, and never
more was seen at Dalton Mill.
Scrapefoot
Once upon a time, there were three Bears who lived in a castle in a
great wood. One of them was a great big Bear, and one was a middling
Bear, and one was a little Bear. And in the same wood there was a Fox
who lived all alone, his name was Scrapefoot. Scrapefoot was very much
afraid of the Bears, but for all that he wanted very much to know all
about them. And one day as he went through the wood he found himself
near the Bears' Castle, and he wondered whether he could get into the
castle. He looked all about him everywhere, and he could not see any
one. So he came up very quietly, till at last he came up to the door of
the castle, and he tried whether he could open it. Yes! the door was not
locked, and he opened it just a little way, and put his nose in and
looked, and he could not see any one. So then he opened it a little way
farther, and put one paw in, and then another paw, and another and
another, and then he was all in the Bears' Castle. He found he was in a
great hall with three chairs in it--one big, one middling, and one
little chair; and he thought he would like to sit down and rest and
look about him; so he sat down on the big chair. But he found it so hard
and uncomfortable that it made his bones ache, and he jumped down at
once and got into the middling chair, and he turned round and round in
it, but he couldn't make himself comfortable. So then he went to the
little chair and sat down in it, and it was so soft and warm and
comfortable that Scrapefoot was quite happy; but all at once it broke to
pieces under him and he couldn't put it together again! So he got up and
began to look about him again, and on one table he saw three saucers, of
which one was very big, one was middling, one was quite a little saucer.
Scrapefoot was very thirsty, and he began to drink out of the big
saucer. But he only just tasted the milk in the big saucer, which was so
sour and so nasty that he would not taste another drop of it. Then he
tried the middling saucer, and he drank a little of that. He tried two
or three mouthfuls, but it was not nice, and then he left it and went to
the little saucer, and the milk in the little saucer was so sweet and so
nice that he went on drinking it till it was all gone.
Then Scrapefoot thought he would like to go upstairs; and he listened
and he could not hear any one. So upstairs he went, and he found a great
room with three beds in it; one was a big bed, and one was a middling
bed, and one was a little white bed; and he climbed up into the big bed,
but it was so hard and lumpy and uncomfortable that he jumped down again
at once, and tried the middling bed. That was rather better, but he
could not get comfortably in it, so after turning about a little while
he got up and went to the little bed; and that was so soft and so warm
and so nice that he fell fast asleep at once.
And after a time the Bears came home, and when they got into the hall
the big Bear went to his chair and said, "WHO'S BEEN SITTING IN MY
CHAIR?" and the middling Bear said, "WHO'S BEEN SITTING IN MY CHAIR?"
and the little Bear said, "Who's been sitting in my chair and has
broken it all to pieces?" And then they went to have their milk, and
the big Bear said, "WHO'S BEEN DRINKING MY MILK?" and the middling Bear
said, "WHO'S BEEN DRINKING MY MILK?" and the little Bear said, "Who's
been drinking my milk and has drunk it all up?" Then they went upstairs
and into the bedroom, and the big Bear said, "WHO'S BEEN SLEEPING IN MY
BED?" and the middling Bear said, "WHO'S BEEN SLEEPING IN MY BED?" and
the little Bear said, "Who's been sleeping in my bed?--and see here he
is!" So then the Bears came and wondered what they should do with him;
and the big Bear said, "Let's hang him!" and then the middling Bear
said, "Let's drown him!" and then the little Bear said, "Let's throw him
out of the window." And then the Bears took him to the window, and the
big Bear took two legs on one side and the middling Bear took two legs
on the other side, and they swung him backwards and forwards, backwards
and forwards, and out of the window. Poor Scrapefoot was so frightened,
and he thought every bone in his body must be broken. But he got up and
first shook one leg--no, that was not broken; and then another, and that
was not broken; and another and another, and then he wagged his tail and
found there were no bones broken. So then he galloped off home as fast
as he could go, and never went near the Bears' Castle again.
The Pedlar of Swaffham
In the old days when London Bridge was lined with shops from one end to
the other, and salmon swam under the arches, there lived at Swaffham, in
Norfolk, a poor pedlar. He'd much ado to make his living, trudging about
with his pack at his back and his dog at his heels, and at the close of
the day's labour was but too glad to sit down and sleep. Now it fell out
that one night he dreamed a dream, and therein he saw the great bridge
of London town, and it sounded in his ears that if he went there he
should hear joyful news. He made little count of the dream, but on the
following night it come back to him, and again on the third night.
Then he said within himself, "I must needs try the issue of it," and so
he trudged up to London town. Long was the way and right glad was he
when he stood on the great bridge and saw the tall houses on right hand
and left, and had glimpses of the water running and the ships sailing
by. All day long he paced to and fro, but he heard nothing that might
yield him comfort. And again on the morrow he stood and he gazed--he
paced afresh the length of London Bridge, but naught did he see and
naught did he hear.
Now the third day being come as he still stood and gazed, a shopkeeper
hard by spoke to him.
"Friend," said he, "I wonder much at your fruitless standing. Have you
no wares to sell?"
"No, indeed," quoth the pedlar.
"And you do not beg for alms."
"Not so long as I can keep myself."
"Then what, I pray thee, dost thou want here, and what may thy business
be?"
"Well, kind sir, to tell the truth, I dreamed that if I came hither, I
should hear good news."
Right heartily did the shopkeeper laugh.
"Nay, thou must be a fool to take a journey on such a silly errand. I'll
tell thee, poor silly country fellow, that I myself dream too o' nights,
and that last night I dreamt myself to be in Swaffham, a place clean
unknown to me, but in Norfolk if I mistake not, and methought I was in
an orchard behind a pedlar's house, and in that orchard was a great
oak-tree. Then meseemed that if I digged I should find beneath that tree
a great treasure. But think you I'm such a fool as to take on me a long
and wearisome journey and all for a silly dream. No, my good fellow,
learn wit from a wiser man than thyself. Get thee home, and mind thy
business."
When the pedlar heard this he spoke no word, but was exceeding glad in
himself, and returning home speedily, digged underneath the great
oak-tree, and found a prodigious great treasure. He grew exceeding rich,
but he did not forget his duty in the pride of his riches. For he built
up again the church at Swaffham, and when he died they put a statue of
him therein all in stone with his pack at his back and his dog at his
heels. And there it stands to this day to witness if I lie.
The Old Witch
Once upon a time there were two girls who lived with their mother and
father. Their father had no work, and the girls wanted to go away and
seek their fortunes. Now one girl wanted to go to service, and her
mother said she might if she could find a place. So she started for the
town. Well, she went all about the town, but no one wanted a girl like
her. So she went on farther into the country, and she came to the place
where there was an oven where there was lots of bread baking. And the
bread said, "Little girl, little girl, take us out, take us out. We have
been baking seven years, and no one has come to take us out." So the
girl took out the bread, laid it on the ground, and went on her way.
Then she met a cow, and the cow said, "Little girl, little girl, milk
me, milk me! Seven years have I been waiting, and no one has come to
milk me." The girl milked the cow into the pails that stood by. As she
was thirsty she drank some, and left the rest in the pails by the cow.
Then she went on a little bit farther, and came to an apple tree, so
loaded with fruit that its branches were breaking down, and the tree
said, "Little girl, little girl, help me shake my fruit. My branches are
breaking, it is so heavy." And the girl said, "Of course I will, you
poor tree." So she shook the fruit all off, propped up the branches, and
left the fruit on the ground under the tree. Then she went on again till
she came to a house. Now in this house there lived a witch, and this
witch took girls into her house as servants. And when she heard that
this girl had left her home to seek service, she said that she would try
her, and give her good wages. The witch told the girl what work she was
to do. "You must keep the house clean and tidy, sweep the floor and the
fireplace; but there is one thing you must never do. You must never look
up the chimney, or something bad will befall you."
So the girl promised to do as she was told, but one morning as she was
cleaning, and the witch was out, she forgot what the witch said, and
looked up the chimney. When she did this a great bag of money fell down
in her lap. This happened again and again. So the girl started to go off
home.
When she had gone some way she heard the witch coming after her. So she
ran to the apple tree and cried:
     "Apple-tree, apple-tree hide me,
      So the old witch can't find me;
      If she does she'll pick my bones,
      And bury me under the marble stones."
So the apple-tree hid her. When the witch came up she said:
[Illustration:
     "Tree of mine, tree of mine,
      Have you seen a girl
      With a willy-willy wag, and a long-tailed bag,
      Who's stole my money, all I had?"]
      Who's stole my money, all I had?"
And the apple-tree said, "No, mother; not for seven year."
When the witch had gone down another way, the girl went on again, and
just as she got to the cow heard the witch coming after her again, so
she ran to the cow and cried:
     "Cow, cow, hide me,
So the cow hid her.
When the old witch came up, she looked about and said to the cow:
     "Cow of mine, cow of mine,
And the cow said, "No, mother, not for seven year."
When the witch had gone off another way, the little girl went on again,
and when she was near the oven she heard the witch coming after her
again, so she ran to the oven and cried:
     "Oven, oven, hide me,
      If she does she'll break my bones,
And the oven said, "I've no room, ask the baker," and the baker hid her
behind the oven.
When the witch came up she looked here and there and everywhere, and
then said to the baker:
     "Man of mine, man of mine,
      Have you seen a girl,
So the baker said, "Look in the oven." The old witch went to look, and
the oven said, "Get in and look in the furthest corner." The witch did
so, and when she was inside the oven shut her door, and the witch was
kept there for a very long time.
The girl then went off again, and reached her home with her money bags,
married a rich man, and lived happy ever afterwards.
The other sister then thought she would go and do the same. And she went
the same way. But when she reached the oven, and the bread said, "Little
girl, little girl, take us out. Seven years have we been baking, and no
one has come to take us out," the girl said, "No, I don't want to burn
my fingers." So she went on till she met the cow, and the cow said,
"Little girl, little girl, milk me, milk me, do. Seven years have I been
waiting, and no one has come to milk me." But the girl said, "No, I
can't milk you, I'm in a hurry," and went on faster. Then she came to
the apple-tree, and the apple-tree asked her to help shake the fruit.
"No, I can't; another day p'raps I may," and went on till she came to
the witch's house. Well, it happened to her just the same as to the
other girl--she forgot what she was told, and one day when the witch was
out, looked up the chimney, and down fell a bag of money. Well, she
thought she would be off at once. When she reached the apple-tree, she
heard the witch coming after her, and she cried:
     "Apple-tree, apple-tree, hide me,
But the tree didn't answer, and she ran on further. Presently the witch
came up and said:
The tree said, "Yes, mother; she's gone down that way."
So the old witch went after her and caught her, she took all the money
away from her, beat her, and sent her off home just as she was.
The Three Wishes
Once upon a time, and be sure 't was a long time ago, there lived a poor
woodman in a great forest, and every day of his life he went out to fell
timber. So one day he started out, and the goodwife filled his wallet
and slung his bottle on his back, that he might have meat and drink in
the forest. He had marked out a huge old oak, which, thought he, would
furnish many and many a good plank. And when he was come to it, he took
his axe in his hand and swung it round his head as though he were minded
to fell the tree at one stroke. But he hadn't given one blow, when what
should he hear but the pitifullest entreating, and there stood before
him a fairy who prayed and beseeched him to spare the tree. He was
dazed, as you may fancy, with wonderment and affright, and he couldn't
open his mouth to utter a word. But he found his tongue at last, and,
"Well," said he, "I'll e'en do as thou wishest."
"You've done better for yourself than you know," answered the fairy,
"and to show I'm not ungrateful, I'll grant you your next three wishes,
be they what they may." And therewith the fairy was no more to be seen,
and the woodman slung his wallet over his shoulder and his bottle at his
side, and off he started home.
But the way was long, and the poor man was regularly dazed with the
wonderful thing that had befallen him, and when he got home there was
nothing in his noddle but the wish to sit down and rest. Maybe, too, 't
was a trick of the fairy's. Who can tell? Anyhow down he sat by the
blazing fire, and as he sat he waxed hungry, though it was a long way
off supper-time yet.
"Hasn't thou naught for supper, dame?" said he to his wife.
"Nay, not for a couple of hours yet," said she.
"Ah!" groaned the woodman, "I wish I'd a good link of black pudding here
before me."
No sooner had he said the word, when clatter, clatter, rustle, rustle,
what should come down the chimney but a link of the finest black pudding
the heart of man could wish for.
If the woodman stared, the goodwife stared three times as much. "What's
all this?" says she.
Then all the morning's work came back to the woodman, and he told his
tale right out, from beginning to end, and as he told it the goodwife
glowered and glowered, and when he had made an end of it she burst out,
"Thou bee'st but a fool, Jan, thou bee'st but a fool; and I wish the
pudding were at thy nose, I do indeed."
And before you could say Jack Robinson, there the goodman sat and his
nose was the longer for a noble link of black pudding.
He gave a pull but it stuck, and she gave a pull but it stuck, and they
both pulled till they had nigh pulled the nose off, but it stuck and
stuck.
"What's to be done now?" said he.
"'T isn't so very unsightly," said she, looking hard at him.
Then the woodman saw that if he wished, he must need wish in a hurry;
and wish he did, that the black pudding might come off his nose. Well!
there it lay in a dish on the table, and if the goodman and goodwife
didn't ride in a golden coach, or dress in silk and satin, why, they had
at least as fine a black pudding for their supper as the heart of man
could desire.
The Buried Moon
Long ago, in my grandmother's time, the Carland was all in bogs, great
pools of black water, and creeping trickles of green water, and squishy
mools which squirted when you stepped on them.
Well, granny used to say how long before her time the Moon herself was
once dead and buried in the marshes, and as she used to tell me, I'll
tell you all about it.
The Moon up yonder shone and shone, just as she does now, and when she
shone she lighted up the bog-pools, so that one could walk about almost
as safe as in the day.
But when she didn't shine, out came the Things that dwelt in the
darkness and went about seeking to do evil and harm; Bogles and Crawling
Horrors, all came out when the Moon didn't shine.
Well, the Moon heard of this, and being kind and good--as she surely is,
shining for us in the night instead of taking her natural rest--she was
main troubled. "I'll see for myself, I will," said she, "maybe it's not
so bad as folks make out."
Sure enough, at the month's end down she stept, wrapped up in a black
cloak, and a black hood over her yellow shining hair. Straight she went
to the bog edge and looked about her. Water here and water there; waving
tussocks and trembling mools, and great black snags all twisted and
bent. Before her all was dark--dark but for the glimmer of the stars in
the pools, and the light that came from her own white feet, stealing out
of her black cloak.
The Moon drew her cloak faster about and trembled, but she wouldn't go
back without seeing all there was to be seen; so on she went, stepping
as light as the wind in summer from tuft to tuft between the greedy
gurgling water holes. Just as she came near a big black pool her foot
slipped and she was nigh tumbling in. She grabbed with both hands at a
snag near by to steady herself with, but as she touched it, it twined
itself round her wrists, like a pair of handcuffs, and gript her so that
she couldn't move. She pulled and twisted and fought, but it was no
good. She was fast, and must stay fast.
Presently as she stood trembling in the dark, wondering if help would
come, she heard something calling in the distance, calling, calling, and
then dying away with a sob, till the marshes were full of this pitiful
crying sound; then she heard steps floundering along, squishing in the
mud and slipping on the tufts, and through the darkness she saw a white
face with great feared eyes.
'T was a man strayed in the bogs. Mazed with fear he struggled on toward
the flickering light that looked like help and safety. And when the
poor Moon saw that he was coming nigher and nigher to the deep hole,
further and further from the path, she was so mad and so sorry that she
struggled and fought and pulled harder than ever. And though she
couldn't get loose, she twisted and turned, till her black hood fell
back off her shining yellow hair, and the beautiful light that came from
it drove away the darkness.
Oh, but the man cried with joy to see the light again. And at once all
evil things fled back into the dark corners, for they cannot abide the
light. So he could see where he was, and where the path was, and how he
could get out of the marsh. And he was in such haste to get away from
the Quicks, and Bogles, and Things that dwelt there, that he scarce
looked at the brave light that came from the beautiful shining yellow
hair, streaming out over the black cloak and falling to the water at his
feet. And the Moon herself was so taken up with saving him, and with
rejoicing that he was back on the right path, that she clean forgot that
she needed help herself, and that she was held fast by the Black Snag.
So off he went; spent and gasping, and stumbling and sobbing with joy,
flying for his life out of the terrible bogs. Then it came over the
Moon, she would main like to go with him. So she pulled and fought as if
she were mad, till she fell on her knees, spent with tugging, at the
foot of the snag. And as she lay there, gasping for breath, the black
hood fell forward over her head. So out went the blessed light and back
came the darkness, with all its Evil Things, with a screech and a howl.
They came crowding round her, mocking and snatching and beating;
shrieking with rage and spite, and swearing and snarling, for they knew
her for their old enemy, that drove them back into the corners, and kept
them from working their wicked wills.
"Drat thee!" yelled the witch-bodies, "thou 'st spoiled our spells this
year agone!"
"And us thou sent'st to brood in the corners!" howled the Bogles.
And all the Things joined in with a great "Ho, ho!" till the very
tussocks shook and the water gurgled. And they began again.
"We'll poison her--poison her!" shrieked the witches.
And "Ho, ho!" howled the Things again.
"We'll smother her--smother her!" whispered the Crawling Horrors, and
twined themselves round her knees.
And "Ho, ho!" mocked the rest of them.
And again they all shouted with spite and ill-will. And the poor Moon
crouched down, and wished she was dead and done with.
And they fought and squabbled what they should do with her, till a pale
grey light began to come in the sky; and it drew nigh the dawning. And
when they saw that, they were feared lest they shouldn't have time to
work their will; and they caught hold of her, with horrid bony fingers,
and laid her deep in the water at the foot of the snag. And the Bogles
fetched a strange big stone and rolled it on top of her, to keep her
from rising. And they told two of the Will-o-the-wykes to take turns in
watching on the black snag, to see that she lay safe and still, and
couldn't get out to spoil their sport.
And there lay the poor Moon, dead and buried in the bog, till some one
would set her loose; and who'd know where to look for her.
Well, the days passed, and 't was the time for the new moon's coming,
and the folk put pennies in their pockets and straws in their caps so as
to be ready for her, and looked about, for the Moon was a good friend to
the marsh folk, and they were main glad when the dark time was gone, and
the paths were safe again, and the Evil Things were driven back by the
blessed Light into the darkness and the waterholes.
But days and days passed, and the new Moon never came, and the nights
were aye dark, and the Evil Things were worse than ever. And still the
days went on, and the new Moon never came. Naturally the poor folk were
strangely feared and mazed, and a lot of them went to the Wise Woman who
dwelt in the old mill, and asked if so be she could find out where the
Moon was gone.
"Well," said she, after looking in the brewpot, and in the mirror, and
in the Book, "it be main queer, but I can't rightly tell ye what's
happened to her. If ye hear of aught, come and tell me."
So they went their ways; and as days went by, and never a Moon came,
naturally they talked--my word! I reckon they did talk! their tongues
wagged at home, and at the inn, and in the garth. But so came one day,
as they sat on the great settle in the Inn, a man from the far end of
the bog lands was smoking and listening, when all at once he sat up and
slapped his knee. "My faicks!" says he, "I'd clean forgot, but I reckon
I kens where the Moon be!" and he told them of how he was lost in the
bogs, and how, when he was nigh dead with fright, the light shone out,
and he found the path and got home safe.
So off they all went to the Wise Woman, and told her about it, and she
looked long in the pot and the Book again, and then she nodded her
head.
"It's dark still, childer, dark!" says she, "and I can't rightly see,
but do as I tell ye, and ye 'll find out for yourselves. Go all of ye,
just afore the night gathers, put a stone in your mouth, and take a
hazel-twig in your hands, and say never a word till you're safe home
again. Then walk on and fear not, far into the midst of the marsh, till
ye find a coffin, a candle, and a cross. Then ye'll not be far from your
Moon; look, and m'appen ye 'll find her."
So came the next night in the darklings, out they went all together,
every man with a stone in his mouth, and a hazel-twig in his hand, and
feeling, thou may'st reckon, main feared and creepy. And they stumbled
and stottered along the paths into the midst of the bogs; they saw
nought, though they heard sighings and flutterings in their ears, and
felt cold wet fingers touching them; but all at once, looking around for
the coffin, the candle, and the cross, while they came nigh to the pool
beside the great snag, where the Moon lay buried. And all at once they
stopped, quaking and mazed and skeery, for there was the great stone,
half in, half out of the water, for all the world like a strange big
coffin; and at the head was the black snag, stretching out its two arms
in a dark gruesome cross, and on it a tiddy light flickered, like a
dying candle. And they all knelt down in the mud, and said, "Our Lord,
first forward, because of the cross, and then backward, to keep off the
Bogles; but without speaking out, for they knew that the Evil Things
would catch them, if they didn't do as the Wise Woman told them."
Then they went nigher, and took hold of the big stone, and shoved it up,
and afterwards they said that for one tiddy minute they saw a strange
and beautiful face looking up at them glad-like out of the black water;
but the Light came so quick and so white and shining, that they stept
back mazed with it, and the very next minute, when they could see again,
there was the full Moon in the sky, bright and beautiful and kind as
ever, shining and smiling down at them, and making the bogs and the
paths as clear as day, and stealing into the very corners, as though
she'd have driven the darkness and the Bogles clean away if she could.
A Son of Adam
A man was one day working. It was very hot, and he was digging.
By-and-by he stopped to rest and wipe his face; and he was very angry to
think he had to work so hard only because of Adam's sin. So he
complained bitterly, and said some very hard words about Adam.
It happened that his master heard him, and he asked, "Why do you blame
Adam? You'd ha' done just like Adam, if you'd a-been in his place."
"No, I shouldn't," said the man; "I should ha' know'd better."
"Well, I'll try you," says his master; "come to me at dinner-time."
So come dinner-time, the man came, and his master took him into a room
where the table was a-set with good things of all sorts. And he said:
"Now, you can eat as much as ever you like from any of the dishes on the
table; but don't touch the covered dish in the middle till I come back."
And with that the master went out of the room and left the man there all
by himself.
So the man sat down and helped himself, and ate some o' this dish and
some o' that, and enjoyed himself finely. But after awhile, as his
master didn't come back, he began to look at the covered dish, and to
wonder whatever was in it. And he wondered more and more, and he says to
himself, "It must be something very nice. Why shouldn't I just look at
it? I won't touch it. There can't be any harm in just peeping." So at
last he could hold back no longer, and he lifted up the cover a tiny
bit; but he couldn't see anything. Then he lifted it up a bit more, and
out popped a mouse. The man tried to catch it; but it ran away and
jumped off the table and he ran after it. It ran first into one corner,
and then, just as he thought he'd got it, into another, and under the
table, and all about the room. And the man made such a clatter, jumping
and banging and running round after the mouse, a-trying to catch it,
that at last his master came in.
"Ah!" he said; "never you blame Adam again, my man!"
The Children in the Wood
     Now ponder well, you parents dear,
       These words which I shall write;
     A doleful story you shall hear,
       In time brought forth to light.
     A gentleman of good account,
       In Norfolk dwelt of late,
     Who did in honour far surmount
       Most men of his estate.
     Sore sick he was and like to die,
       No help his life could save;
     His wife by him as sick did lie,
       And both possest one grave.
     No love between these two was lost,
       Each was to other kind;
     In love they lived, in love they died,
       And left two babes behind.
     The one a fine and pretty boy
       Not passing three years old,
     The other a girl more young than he,
       And framed in beauty's mould.
     The father left his little son,
       As plainly did appear,
     When he to perfect age should come,
       Three hundred pounds a year;
     And to his little daughter Jane
       Five hundred pounds in gold,
     To be paid down on marriage-day,
       Which might not be controlled.
     But if the children chanced to die
       Ere they to age should come,
     Their uncle should possess their wealth;
       For so the will did run.
     "Now, brother," said the dying man,
       "Look to my children dear;
     Be good unto my boy and girl,
       No friends else have they here;
     To God and you I recommend
       My children dear this day;
     But little while be sure we have
       Within this world to stay.
     "You must be father and mother both,
       And uncle, all in one;
     God knows what will become of them
       When I am dead and gone."
     With that bespake their mother dear:
       "O brother kind," quoth she,
     "You are the man must bring our babes
       To wealth or misery.
     "And if you keep them carefully,
       Then God will you reward;
     But if you otherwise should deal,
       God will your deeds regard."
     With lips as cold as any stone,
       They kissed their children small:
     "God bless you both, my children dear!"
       With that the tears did fall.
     These speeches then their brother spake
       To this sick couple there:
     "The keeping of your little ones,
       Sweet sister, do not fear;
     God never prosper me nor mine,
       Nor aught else that I have,
     If I do wrong your children dear
       When you are laid in grave!"
     The parents being dead and gone,
       The children home he takes,
     And brings them straight unto his house
       Where much of them he makes.
     He had not kept these pretty babes
       A twelvemonth and a day,
     But, for their wealth, he did devise
       To make them both away.
     He bargained with two ruffians strong,
       Which were of furious mood,
     That they should take these children young,
       And slay them in a wood.
     He told his wife an artful tale
       He would the children send
     To be brought up in London town
       With one that was his friend.
     Away then went those pretty babes,
       Rejoicing at that tide,
     Rejoicing with a merry mind
       They should on cock-horse ride.
     They prate and prattle pleasantly,
       As they ride on the way,
     To those that should their butchers be
       And work their lives' decay:
     So that the pretty speech they had
       Made Murder's heart relent;
     And they that undertook the deed
       Full sore now did repent.
     Yet one of them, more hard of heart,
       Did vow to do his charge,
     Because the wretch that hired him
       Had paid him very large.
     The other won't agree thereto,
       So there they fall to strife;
     With one another they did fight
       About the children's life;
     And he that was of mildest mood
       Did slay the other there,
     Within an unfrequented wood;
       The babes did quake for fear!
     He took the children by the hand,
       Tears standing in their eye,
     And bade them straightway follow him,
       And look they did not cry;
     And two long miles he led them on,
       While they for food complain:
     "Stay here," quoth he, "I'll bring you bread,
       When I come back again."
     These pretty babes, with hand in hand,
       Went wandering up and down;
     But never more could see the man
       Approaching from the town.
     Their pretty lips with blackberries
       Were all besmeared and dyed;
     And when they saw the darksome night,
       They sat them down and cried.
     Thus wandered these poor innocents,
       Till death did end their grief;
     In one another's arms they died,
       As wanting due relief:
     No burial this pretty pair
       From any man receives,
     Till Robin Redbreast piously
       Did cover them with leaves.
     And now the heavy wrath of God
       Upon their uncle fell;
     Yea, fearful fiends did haunt his house,
       His conscience felt an hell:
     His barns were fired, his goods consumed,
       His lands were barren made,
     His cattle died within the field,
       And nothing with him stayed.
     And in a voyage to Portugal
       Two of his sons did die;
     And to conclude, himself was brought
       To want and misery:
     He pawned and mortgaged all his land
       Ere seven years came about.
     And now at last this wicked act
       Did by this means come out,
     The fellow that did take in hand
       These children for to kill,
     Was for a robbery judged to die,
       Such was God's blessèd will:
     Who did confess the very truth,
       As here hath been displayed:
     The uncle having died in jail,
       Where he for debt was laid.
     You that executors be made,
       And overseers eke,
     Of children that be fatherless,
       And infants mild and meek,
     Take you example by this thing,
       And yield to each his right,
     Lest God with suchlike misery
       Your wicked minds requite.
The Hobyahs
Once there was an old man and woman and a little girl, and they all
lived in a house made of hempstalks. Now the old man had a little dog
named Turpie; and one night the Hobyahs came and said, "Hobyah! Hobyah!
Hobyah! Tear down the hempstalks, eat up the old man and woman, and
carry off the little girl!" But little dog Turpie barked so that the
Hobyahs ran off; and the old man said, "Little dog Turpie barks so that
I cannot sleep nor slumber, and if I live till morning I will cut off
his tail." So in the morning the old man cut off little dog Turpie's
tail.
The next night the Hobyahs came again, and said, "Hobyah! Hobyah!
one of his legs." So in the morning the old man cut off one of little
dog Turpie's legs.
another of his legs." So in the morning the old man cut off another of
little dog Turpie's legs.
little dog Turpie's head." So in the morning the old man cut off little
dog Turpie's head.
carry off the little girl!" And when the Hobyahs found that little dog
Turpie's head was off they tore down the hempstalks, ate up the old man
and woman, and carried the little girl off in a bag.
And when the Hobyahs came to their home they hung up the bag with the
little girl in it, and every Hobyah knocked on the top of the bag and
said, "Look me! look me!" And then they went to sleep until the next
night, for the Hobyahs slept in the daytime.
The little girl cried a great deal, and a man with a big dog came that
way and heard her crying. When he asked her how she came there and she
told him, he put the dog in the bag and took the little girl to his
The next night the Hobyahs took down the bag and knocked on the top of
it, and said "Look me! look me!" and when they opened the bag--the big
dog jumped out and ate them all up; so there are no Hobyahs now.
A Pottle o' Brains
Once in these parts, and not so long gone neither, there was a fool that
wanted to buy a pottle o' brains, for he was ever getting into scrapes
through his foolishness, and being laughed at by every one. Folk told
him that he could get everything he liked from the wise woman that lived
on the top o' the hill, and dealt in potions and herbs and spells and
things, and could tell thee! all as 'd come to thee or thy folk. So he
told his mother, and asked her if he could seek the wise woman and buy a
pottle o' brains.
"That ye should," says she; "thou 'st sore need o' them, my son: and if
I should die, who'd take care o' a poor fool such 's thou, no more fit
to look after thyself than an unborn baby? but mind thy manners, and
speak her pretty, my lad; for they wise folk are gey and light
mispleased."
So off he went after his tea, and there she was, sitting by the fire,
and stirring a big pot.
"Good e'en, missis," says he, "it's a fine night."
"Aye," says she, and went on stirring.
"It'll maybe rain," says he, and fidgeted from one foot to t' other.
"Maybe," says she.
"And m'appen it won't," says he, and looked out o' the window.
"M'appen," says she.
And he scratched his head and twisted his hat.
"Well," says he, "I can't mind nothing else about the weather, but let
me see; the crops are getting on fine."
"Fine," says she.
"And--and--the beasts is fattening," says he.
"They are," says she.
"And--and--" says he, and comes to a stop--"I reckon we'll tackle
business now, having done the polite like. Have you any brains for to
sell?"
"That depends," says she, "if thou wants king's brains, or soldier's
brains, or schoolmaster's brains, I dinna keep 'em."
"Hout no," says he, "jist ordinary brains--fit for any fool--same as
every one has about here; something clean common-like."
"Aye so," says the wise woman, "I might manage that, if so be thou 'lt
help thyself."
"How's that for, missis?" says he.
"Jest so," says she, looking in the pot; "bring me the heart of the
thing thou likest best of all, and I'll tell thee where to get thy
pottle o' brains."
"But," says he, scratching his head, "how can I do that?"
"That's no for me to say," says she, "find out for thyself, my lad! if
thou doesn't want to be a fool all thy days. But thou 'll have to read
me a riddle so as I can see thou 'st brought the right thing, and if thy
brains is about thee. And I've something else to see to," says she, "so
gode'en to thee," and she carried the pot away with her into the back
place.
So off went the fool to his mother, and told her what the wise woman
"And I reckon I'll have to kill that pig," says he, "for I like fat
bacon better than anything."
"Then do it, my lad," said his mother, "for certain 't will be a strange
and good thing fur thee, if thou canst buy a pottle o' brains, and be
able to look after thy own self."
So he killed his pig, and next day off he went to the wise woman's
cottage, and there she sat, reading in a great book.
"Gode'en, missis," says he, "I've brought thee the heart o' the thing I
like the best of all; and I put it hapt in paper on the table."
"Aye so?" says she, and looked at him through her spectacles. "Tell me
this then, what runs without feet?"
He scratched his head, and thought, and thought, but he couldn't tell.
"Go thy ways," says she, "thou 'st not fetched me the right thing yet.
I've no brains for thee to-day." And she clapt the book together, and
turned her back.
So off the fool went to tell his mother. But as he got nigh the house,
out came folk running to tell him that his mother was dying.
And when he got in, his mother only looked at him and smiled as if to
say she could leave him with a quiet mind since he had got brains enough
now to look after himself--and then she died.
So down he sat and the more he thought about it the badder he felt. He
minded how she'd nursed him when he was a tiddy brat, and helped him
with his lessons, and cooked his dinners, and mended his clouts, and
bore with his foolishness; and he felt sorrier and sorrier, while he
began to sob and greet.
"Oh, mother, mother!" says he, "who'll take care of me now? Thou
shouldn't have left me alone, for I liked thee better than everything!"
And as he said that, he thought of the words of the wise woman. "Hi,
yi!" says he, "must I take mother's heart to her?"
"No! I can't do that," says he. "What'll I do? what'll I do to get that
pottle o' brains, now I'm alone in the world?" So he thought and thought
and thought, and next day he went and borrowed a sack, and bundled his
mother in, and carried it on his shoulder up to the wise woman's
cottage.
"Gode'en, missis," says he, "I reckon I've fetched thee the right thing
this time, surely," and he plumped the sack down kerflap! in the
doorsill.
"Maybe," says the wise woman, "but read me this, now, what's yellow and
shining but isn't gold?"
And he scratched his head, and thought and thought, but he couldn't
tell.
"Thou 'st not hit the right thing, my lad," says she. "I doubt thou 'rt
a bigger fool than I thought!" and shut the door in his face.
"See there!" says he, and set down by the road side and greets.
"I've lost the only two things as I cared for, and what else can I find
to buy a pottle o' brains with!" and he fair howled, till the tears ran
down into his mouth. And up came a lass that lived near at hand, and
looked at him.
"What's up with thee, fool?" says she.
"Oo, I've killed my pig, and lost my mother and I'm nobbut a fool
myself," says he, sobbing.
"That's bad," says she; "and haven't thee anybody to look after thee?"
"No," says he, "and I canna buy my pottle o' brains, for there's nothing
I like best left!"
"What art talking about?" says she.
And down she sets by him, and he told her all about the wise woman and
the pig, and his mother and the riddles, and that he was alone in the
world.
"Well," says she, "I wouldn't mind looking after thee myself."
"Could thee do it?" says he.
"Ou, ay!" says she; "folks say as fools make good husbands, and I reckon
I'll have thee, if thou 'rt willing."
"Can'st cook?" says he.
"Ay, I can," says she.
"And scrub?" says he.
"Surely," says she.
"And mend my clouts?" says he.
"I can that," says she.
"I reckon thou 'lt do then as well as anybody," says he; "but what'll I
do about this wise woman?"
"Oh, wait a bit," says she, "something may turn up, and it'll not matter
if thou 'rt a fool, so long'st thou 'st got me to look after thee."
"That's true," says he, and off they went and got married. And she kept
his house so clean and neat, and cooked his dinner so fine, that one
night he says to her: "Lass, I'm thinking I like thee best of everything
after all."
"That's good hearing," says she, "and what then?"
"Have I got to kill thee, dost think, and take thy heart up to the wise
woman for that pottle o' brains?"
"Law, no!" says she, looking skeered, "I winna have that. But see here;
thou didn't cut out thy mother's heart, did thou?"
"No; but if I had, maybe I'd have got my pottle o' brains," says he.
"Not a bit of it," says she; "just thou take me as I be, heart and all,
and I'll wager I'll help thee read the riddles."
"Can thee so?" says he, doubtful like; "I reckon they're too hard for
women folk."
"Well," says she, "let's see now. Tell me the first"
"What runs without feet?" says he.
"Why, water!" says she.
"It do," says he, and scratched his head.
"And what's yellow and shining but isn't gold?"
"Why, the sun!" says she.
"Faith, it be!" says he. "Come, we'll go up to the wise woman at once,"
and off they went. And as they came up the pad, she was sitting at the
door, twining straws.
"Gode'en, missis," says he.
"Gode'en, fool," says she.
"I reckon I've fetched thee the right thing at last," says he.
The wise woman looked at them both, and wiped her spectacles.
"Canst tell me what that is as has first no legs, and then two legs, and
ends with four legs?"
And the fool scratched his head and thought and thought, but he couldn't
And the lass whispered in his ear:
"It's a tadpole."
"M'appen," says he then, "it may be a tadpole, missis."
The wise woman nodded her head.
"That's right," says she, "and thou 'st got thy pottle o' brains
already."
"Where be they?" says he, looking about and feeling in his pockets.
"In thy wife's head," says she. "The only cure for a fool is a good wife
to look after him, and that thou 'st got, so gode'en to thee!" And with
that she nodded to them, and up and into the house.
So they went home together, and he never wanted to buy a pottle o'
brains again, for his wife had enough for both.
The King of England and His Three Sons
Once upon a time there was an old king who had three sons; and the old
king fell very sick one time and there was nothing at all could make him
well but some golden apples from a far country. So the three brothers
went on horseback to look for some of these apples. They set off
together, and when they came to cross-roads they halted and refreshed
themselves a bit; and then they agreed to meet on a certain time, and
not one was to go home before the other. So Valentine took the right,
and Oliver went straight on, and poor Jack took the left.
To make my long story short, I shall follow poor Jack, and let the other
two take their chance, for I don't think there was much good in them.
Off poor Jack rides over hills, dales, valleys, and mountains, through
woolly woods and sheepwalks, where the old chap never sounded his hollow
bugle-horn, farther than I can tell you to-night or ever intend to tell
you.
At last he came to an old house, near a great forest, and there was an
old man sitting out by the door, and his look was enough to frighten you
or any one else; and the old man said to him:
"Good morning, my king's son."
"Good morning to you, old gentleman," was the young prince's answer;
frightened out of his wits though he was, he didn't like to give in.
The old gentleman told him to dismount and to go in to have some
refreshment, and to put his horse in the stable, such as it was. Jack
soon felt much better after having something to eat, and began to ask
the old gentleman how he knew he was a king's son.
"Oh dear!" said the old man, "I knew that you were a king's son, and I
know what is your business better than what you do yourself. So you will
have to stay here to-night; and when you are in bed you mustn't be
frightened whatever you may hear. There will come all manner of frogs
and snakes, and some will try to get into your eyes and your mouth, but
mind, don't stir the least bit or you will turn into one of those things
yourself."
Poor Jack didn't know what to make of this, but, however, he ventured to
go to bed. Just as he thought to have a bit of sleep, round and over and
under him they came, but he never stirred an inch all night.
"Well, my young son, how are you this morning?"
"Oh, I am very well, thank you, but I didn't have much rest."
"Well, never mind that; you have got on very well so far, but you have
a great deal to go through before you can have the golden apples to go
to your father. You'd better come and have some breakfast before you
start on your way to my other brother's house. You will have to leave
your own horse here with me until you come back again, and tell me
everything about how you get on."
After that out came a fresh horse for the young prince, and the old man
gave him a ball of yarn, and he flung it between the horse's two ears.
Off he went as fast as the wind, which the wind behind could not catch
the wind before, until he came to the second oldest brother's house.
When he rode up to the door he had the same salute as from the first old
man, but this one was even uglier than the first one. He had long grey
hair, and his teeth were curling out of his mouth, and his finger- and
toe-nails had not been cut for many thousand years. He put the horse
into a much better stable, and called Jack in, and gave him plenty to
eat and drink, and they had a bit of a chat before they went to bed.
"Well, my young son," said the old man, "I suppose you are one of the
king's children come to look for the golden apples to bring him back to
health."
"Yes, I am the youngest of the three brothers, and I should like to get
them to go back with."
"Well, don't mind, my young son. Before you go to bed to-night I will
send to my eldest brother, and will tell him what you want, and he won't
have much trouble in sending you on to the place where you must get the
apples. But mind not to stir to-night no matter how you get bitten and
stung, or else you will work great mischief to yourself."
The young man went to bed and bore all, as he did the first night, and
got up the next morning well and hearty. After a good breakfast out
comes a fresh horse, and a ball of yarn to throw between his ears. The
old man told him to jump up quick, and said that he had made it all
right with his eldest brother, not to delay for anything whatever,
"For," said he, "you have a good deal to go through with in a very short
and quick time."
He flung the ball, and off he goes as quick as lightning, and comes to
the eldest brother's house. The old man receives him very kindly and
told him he long wished to see him, and that he would go through his
work like a man and come back safe and sound. "To-night," said he, "I
will give you rest; there shall nothing come to disturb you, so that you
may not feel sleepy for to-morrow. And you must mind to get up middling
early, for you've got to go and come all in the same day; there will be
no place for you to rest within thousands of miles of that place; and if
there was, you would stand in great danger never to come from there in
your own form. Now, my young prince, mind what I tell you. To-morrow,
when you come in sight of a very large castle, which will be surrounded
with black water, the first thing you will do you will tie your horse to
a tree, and you will see three beautiful swans in sight, and you will
say, 'Swan, swan, carry me over in the name of the Griffin of the
Greenwood,' and the swans will swim you over to the earth. There will
be three great entrances, the first guarded by four great giants with
drawn swords in their hands, the second by lions, the other by fiery
serpents and dragons. You will have to be there exactly at one o'clock;
and mind and leave there precisely at two and not a moment later. When
the swans carry you over to the castle, you will pass all these things,
all fast asleep, but you must not notice any of them.
"When you go in, you will turn up to the right; you will see some grand
rooms, then you will go downstairs through the cooking kitchen, and
through; a door on your left you go into a garden, where you will find
the apples you want for your father to get well. After you fill your
wallet, you make all speed you possibly can, and call out for the swans
to carry you over the same as before. After you get on your horse,
should you hear anything shouting or making any noise after you, be sure
not to look back, as they will follow you for thousands of miles; but
when the time is up and you get near my place, it will be all over. Well
now, my young man, I have told you all you have to do to-morrow; and
mind, whatever you do, don't look about you when you see all those
frightful things asleep. Keep a good heart, and make haste from there,
and come back to me with all the speed you can. I should like to know
how my two brothers were when you left them, and what they said to you
about me."
[Illustration: The Castle of Melvales
     Swan Swan,
     Carry me over,
     In the name of the Griffin of Greenwood.]
"Well, to tell the truth, before I left London my father was sick, and
said I was to come here to look for the golden apples, for they were the
only things that would do him good; and when I came to your youngest
brother, he told me many things I had to do before I came here. And I
thought once that your youngest brother put me in the wrong bed, when he
put all those snakes to bite me all night long, until your second
brother told me 'So it was to be,' and said, 'It is the same here,' but
said you had none in your beds."
"Well, let's go to bed. You need not fear. There are no snakes here."
The young man went to bed, and had a good night's rest, and got up the
next morning as fresh as newly caught trout. Breakfast being over, out
comes the other horse, and, while saddling and fettling, the old man
began to laugh, and told the young gentleman that if he saw a pretty
young lady, not to stay with her too long, because she might waken, and
then he would have to stay with her or to be turned into one of those
unearthly monsters, like those he would have to pass by going into the
castle.
"Ha! ha! ha! you make me laugh so that I can scarcely buckle the
saddle-straps. I think I shall make it all right, my uncle, if I see a
young lady there, you may depend."
"Well, my boy, I shall see how you will get on."
So he mounts his Arab steed, and off he goes like a shot out of a gun.
At last he comes in sight of the castle. He ties his horse safe to a
tree, and pulls out his watch. It was then a quarter to one, when he
called out, "Swan, swan, carry me over, for the name of the old Griffin
of the Greenwood." No sooner said than done. A swan under each side,
and one in front, took him over in a crack. He got on his legs, and
walked quietly by all those giants, lions, fiery serpents, and all
manner of other frightful things too numerous to mention, while they
were fast asleep, and that only for the space of one hour, when into the
castle he goes neck or nothing. Turning to the right, upstairs he runs,
and enters into a very grand bedroom, and sees a beautiful Princess
lying full stretch on a gold bedstead, fast asleep. He gazed on her
beautiful form with admiration, and he takes her garter off, and buckles
it on his own leg, and he buckles his on hers; he also takes her gold
watch and pocket-handkerchief, and exchanges his for hers; after that he
ventures to give her a kiss, when she very nearly opened her eyes.
Seeing the time short, off he runs downstairs, and passing through the
kitchen to go into the garden for the apples, he could see the cook
all-fours on her back on the middle of the floor, with the knife in one
hand and the fork in the other. He found the apples, and filled the
wallet; and on passing through the kitchen the cook near wakened, but he
was obliged to make all the speed he possibly could, as the time was
nearly up. He called out for the swans, and they managed to take him
over; but they found that he was a little heavier than before. No sooner
than he had mounted his horse he could hear a tremendous noise, the
enchantment was broke, and they tried to follow him, but all to no
purpose. He was not long before he came to the oldest brother's house;
and glad enough he was to see it, for the sight and the noise of all
those things that were after him nearly frightened him to death.
"Welcome, my boy; I am proud to see you. Dismount and put the horse in
the stable, and come in and have some refreshments; I know you are
hungry after all you have gone through in that castle. And tell me all
you did, and all you saw there. Other kings' sons went by here to go to
that castle, but they never came back alive, and you are the only one
that ever broke the spell. And now you must come with me, with a sword
in your hand, and must cut my head off, and must throw it in that well."
The young Prince dismounts, and puts his horse in the stable, and they
go in to have some refreshments, for I can assure you he wanted some;
and after telling everything that passed, which the old gentleman was
very pleased to hear, they both went for a walk together, the young
Prince looking around and seeing the place looking dreadful, as did the
old man. He could scarcely walk from his toe-nails curling up like ram's
horns that had not been cut for many hundred years, and big long hair.
They come to a well, and the old man gives the Prince a sword, and tells
him to cut his head off, and throw it in that well. The young man has to
do it against his wish, but has to do it.
No sooner has he flung the head in the well, than up springs one of the
finest young gentlemen you would wish to see; and instead of the old
house and the frightful-looking place, it was changed into a beautiful
hall and grounds. And they went back and enjoyed themselves well, and
had a good laugh about the castle.
The young Prince leaves this young gentleman in all his glory, and he
tells the young Prince before leaving that he will see him again before
long. They have a jolly shake-hands, and off he goes to the next oldest
brother; and, to make my long story short, he has to serve the other two
brothers the same as the first.
Now the youngest brother began to ask him how things went on. "Did you
see my two brothers?"
"Yes."
"How did they look?"
"Oh! they looked very well. I liked them much. They told me many things
what to do."
"Well, did you go to the castle?"
"Yes, my uncle."
"And will you tell me what you see in there? Did you see the young
lady?"
"Yes, I saw her, and plenty of other frightful things."
"Did you hear any snake biting you in my oldest brother's bed?"
"No, there were none there; I slept well."
"You won't have to sleep in the same bed to-night. You will have to cut
my head off in the morning."
The young Prince had a good night's rest, and changed all the appearance
of the place by cutting his friend's head off before he started in the
morning. A jolly shake-hands, and the uncle tells him it's very probable
he shall see him again soon when he is not aware of it. This one's
mansion was very pretty, and the country around it beautiful, after his
head was cut off. Off Jack goes, over hills, dales, valleys, and
mountains, and very near losing his apples again.
At last he arrives at the cross-roads, where he has to meet his brothers
on the very day appointed. Coming up to the place, he sees no tracks of
horses, and, being very tired, he lays himself down to sleep, by tying
the horse to his leg, and putting the apples under his head. Presently
up come the other brothers the same time to the minute, and found him
fast asleep; and they would not waken him, but said one to another, "Let
us see what sort of apples he has got under his head." So they took and
tasted them, and found they were different to theirs. They took and
changed his apples for theirs, and off to London as fast as they could,
and left the poor fellow sleeping.
After a while he awoke, and, seeing the tracks of other horses, he
mounted and off with him, not thinking anything about the apples being
changed. He had still a long way to go, and by the time he got near
London he could hear all the bells in the town ringing, but did not know
what was the matter till he rode up to the palace, when he came to know
that his father was recovered by his brothers' apples. When he got there
his two brothers were off to some sports for a while; and the King was
glad to see his youngest son, and very anxious to taste his apples. But
when he found out that they were not good, and thought that they were
more for poisoning him, he sent immediately for the headsman to behead
his youngest son, who was taken away there and then in a carriage. But
instead of the headsman taking his head off, he took him to a forest not
far from the town, because he had pity on him, and there left him to
take his chance, when presently up comes a big hairy bear, limping upon
three legs. The Prince, poor fellow, climbed up a tree, frightened of
him, but the bear told him to come down, that it was no use of him to
stop there. With hard persuasion poor Jack comes down, and the bear
speaks to him and bids him "Come here to me; I will not do you any harm.
It's better for you to come with me and have some refreshments; I know
that you are hungry all this time."
The poor young Prince says, "No, I am not hungry; but I was very
frightened when I saw you coming to me first, as I had no place to run
away from you."
The bear said, "I was also afraid of you when I saw that gentleman
setting you down from the carriage. I thought you would have guns with
you, and that you would not mind killing me if you saw me; but when I
saw the gentleman going away with the carriage, and leaving you behind
by yourself, I made bold to come to you, to see who you were, and now I
know who you are very well. Are you not the king's youngest son? I have
seen you and your brothers and lots of other gentlemen in this wood many
times. Now before we go from here, I must tell you that I am in
disguise; and I shall take you where we are stopping."
The young Prince tells him everything from first to last, how he started
in search of the apples, and about the three old men, and about the
castle, and how he was served at last by his father after he came home;
and instead of the headsman taking his head off, he was kind enough to
leave him his life, "and here I am now, under your protection."
The bear tells him, "Come on, my brother; there shall no harm come to
you as long as you are with me."
So he takes him up to the tents; and when they see 'em coming, the girls
begin to laugh, and say, "Here is our Jubal coming with a young
gentleman." When he advanced nearer the tents, they all knew that he was
the young Prince that had passed by that way many times before; and when
Jubal went to change himself, he called most of them together into one
tent, and told them all about him, and to be kind to him. And so they
were, for there was nothing that he desired but what he had, the same as
if he was in the palace with his father and mother. Jubal, after he
pulled off his hairy coat, was one of the finest young men amongst them,
and he was the young Prince's closest companion. The young Prince was
always very sociable and merry, only when he thought of the gold watch
he had from the young Princess in the castle, and which he had lost he
knew not where.
He passed off many happy days in the forest; but one day he and poor
Jubal were strolling through the trees, when they came to the very spot
where they first met, and, accidentally looking up, he could see his
watch hanging in the tree which he had to climb when he first saw poor
Jubal coming to him in the form of a bear; and he cries out, "Jubal,
Jubal, I can see my watch up in that tree."
"Well, I am sure, how lucky!" exclaimed poor Jubal; "shall I go and get
it down?"
"No, I'd rather go myself," said the young Prince.
Now whilst all this was going on, the young Princess in that castle,
seeing that one of the King of England's sons had been there by the
changing of the watch and other things, got herself ready with a large
army, and sailed off for England. She left her army a little out of the
town, and she went with her guards straight up to the palace to see the
King, and also demanded to see his sons. They had a long conversation
together about different things. At last she demands one of the sons to
come before her; and the oldest comes, when she asks him, "Have you ever
been at the Castle of Melvales?" and he answers, "Yes." She throws down
a pocket handkerchief and bids him to walk over it without stumbling. He
goes to walk over it, and no sooner did he put his foot on it, than he
fell down and broke his leg. He was taken off immediately and made a
prisoner of by her own guards. The other was called upon, and was asked
the same questions, and I had to go through the same performance, and he
also was made a prisoner of. Now she says, "Have you not another son?"
when the King began so to shiver and shake and knock his two knees
together that he could scarcely stand upon his legs, and did not know
what to say to her, he was so much frightened. At last a thought came to
him to send for his headsman, and inquire of him particularly, Did he
behead his son, or was he alive?
"He is saved, O King."
"Then bring him here immediately, or else I shall be done for."
Two of the fastest horses they had were put in the carriage, to go and
look for the poor Prince; and when they got to the very spot where they
left him, it was the time when the Prince was up the tree, getting his
watch down, and poor Jubal standing a distance off. They cried out to
him, Had he seen another young man in this wood? Jubal, seeing such a
nice carriage, thought something, and did not like to say No, and said
Yes, and pointed up the tree; and they told him to come down
immediately, as there was a young lady in search of him.
"Ha! ha! ha! Jubal, did you ever hear such a thing in all your life, my
brother?"
"Do you call him your brother?"
"Well, he has been better to me than my brothers."
"Well, for his kindness he shall accompany you to the palace, and see
how things turn out."
After they go to the palace, the Prince has a good wash, and appears
before the Princess, when she asks him, Had he ever been at the Castle
of Melvales? With a smile upon his face, he gives a graceful bow. And
says my Lady, "Walk over that handkerchief without stumbling." He walks
over it many times, and dances upon it, and nothing happened to him. She
said, with a proud and smiling air, "That is the young man;" and out
come the objects exchanged by both of them. Presently she orders a very
large box to be brought in and to be opened, and out come some of the
most costly uniforms that were ever worn on an emperor's back; and when
he dressed himself up, the King could scarcely look upon him from the
dazzling of the gold and diamonds on his coat. He orders his two
brothers to be in confinement for a period of time; and before the
Princess asks him to go with her to her own country, she pays a visit to
the bear's camp, and she makes some very handsome presents for their
kindness to the young Prince. And she gives Jubal an invitation to go
with them, which he accepts; wishes them a hearty farewell for a while,
promising to see them all again in some little time.
They go back to the King and bid farewell, and tell him not to be so
hasty another time to order people to be beheaded before having a proper
cause for it. Off they go with all their army with them; but while the
soldiers were striking their tents, the Prince bethought himself of his
Welsh harp, and had it sent for immediately to take with him in a
beautiful wooden case. They called to see each of those three brothers
whom the Prince had to stay with when he was on his way to the Castle of
Melvales; and I can assure you, when they all got together, they had a
very merry time of it. And there we will leave them.
King John and the Abbot of Canterbury
In the reign of King John there lived an Abbot of Canterbury who kept up
grand state in his Abbey. A hundred of the Abbot's men dined each day
with him in his refectory, and fifty knights in velvet coats and gold
chains waited upon him daily. Well, King John, as you know, was a very
bad king, and he couldn't brook the idea of any one in his kingdom,
however holy he might be, being honoured more than he. So he summoned
the Abbot of Canterbury to his presence.
The Abbot came with a goodly retinue, with his fifty knights-at-arms in
velvet cloaks and gold chains. The King went to meet him, and said to
him, "How now, father Abbot? I hear it of thee, thou keepest far greater
state than I. This becomes not our royal dignity, and savours of treason
in thee."
"My liege," quoth the Abbot, bending low, "I beg to say that all I spend
has been freely given to the Abbey out of the piety of the folk. I trust
your Grace will not take it ill that I spend for the Abbey's sake what
is the Abbey's."
"Nay, proud prelate," answered the King, "all that is in this fair realm
of England is our own, and thou hast no right to put me to shame by
holding such state. However, of my clemency I will spare thee thy life
and thy property if you can answer me but three questions."
"I will do so, my liege," said the Abbot, "so far as my poor wit can
extend."
"Well, then," said the King, "tell me where is the centre of all the
world round; then let me know how soon can I ride the whole world about;
and, lastly, tell me what I think."
"Your Majesty jesteth," stammered the Abbot.
"Thou wilt find it no jest," said the King. "Unless thou canst answer me
these questions three before a week is out, thy head will leave thy
body;" and he turned away.
Well, the Abbot rode off in fear and trembling, and first he went to
Oxford to see if any learned doctor could tell him the answer to those
questions three; but none could help him, and he took his way to
Canterbury, sad and sorrowful, to take leave of his monks. But on his
way he met his shepherd as he was going to the fold.
"Welcome home, Lord Abbot," quoth the shepherd; "what news from good
King John?"
"Sad news, sad news, my shepherd," said the Abbot, and told him all that
had happened.
"Now, cheer up, Sir Abbot," said the shepherd. "A fool may perhaps
answer what a wise man knows not. I will go to London in your stead;
grant me only your apparel and your retinue of knights. At the least I
can die in your place."
"Nay, shepherd, not so," said the Abbot; "I must meet the danger in my
own person. And to that, thou canst not pass for me."
"But I can and I will, Sir Abbot. In a cowl, who will know me for what I
am?"
So at last the Abbot consented, and sent him to London in his most
splendid array, and he approached King John with all his retinue as
before, but dressed in his simple monk's dress and his cowl over his
face.
"Now welcome, Sir Abbot," said King John; "thou art prepared for thy
doom, I see."
"I am ready to answer your Majesty," said he.
"Well, then, question first--where is the centre of the round earth?"
said the King.
"Here," said the shepherd Abbot, planting his crozier in the ground;
"an' your Majesty believe me not, go measure it and see."
"By St. Botolph," said the King, "a merry answer and a shrewd; so to
question the second. How soon may I ride this round world about?"
"If your Majesty will graciously rise with the sun, and ride along with
him until the next morning he rise, your Grace will surely have ridden
it round."
"By St. John," laughed King John, "I did not think it could be done so
soon. But let that pass, and tell me question third and last, and that
is--What do I think?"
"That is easy, your Grace," said he. "Your Majesty thinks I am my lord
the Abbot of Canterbury; but as you may see," and here he raised his
cowl, "I am but his poor shepherd, that am come to ask your pardon for
him and for me."
Loud laughed the King. "Well caught. Thou hast more wit than thy lord,
and thou shalt be Abbot in his place."
"Nay, that cannot be," quoth the shepherd; "I know not to write nor to
read."
"Well, then, four nobles a week thou shalt have for the ready wit. And
tell the Abbot from me that he has my pardon." And with that King John
sent away the shepherd with a right royal present, besides his pension.
Rushen Coatie
There was once a king and a queen, as many a one has been; few have we
seen, and as few may we see. But the queen died, leaving only one bonny
girl, and she told her on her death-bed: "My dear, after I am gone,
there will come to you a little red calf, and whenever you want
anything, speak to it, and it will give it you."
Now, after a while, the king married again an ill-natured wife, with
three ugly daughters of her own. And they hated the king's daughter
because she was so bonny. So they took all her fine clothes away from
her, and gave her only a coat made of rushes. So they called her Rushen
Coatie, and made her sit in the kitchen nook, amid the ashes. And when
dinner-time came, the nasty stepmother sent her out a thimbleful of
broth, a grain of barley, a thread of meat, and a crumb of bread. But
when she had eaten all this, she was just as hungry as before, so she
said to herself: "Oh! how I wish I had something to eat." Just then, who
should come in but a little red calf, and said to her: "Put your finger
into my left ear." She did so, and found some nice bread. Then the calf
told her to put her finger into its right ear, and she found there some
cheese, and made a right good meal of the bread and cheese. And so it
went on from day to day.
Now the king's wife thought Rushen Coatie would soon die from the scanty
food she got, and she was surprised to see her as lively and healthy as
ever. So she set one of her ugly daughters on the watch at meal times to
find out how Rushen Coatie got enough to live on. The daughter soon
found out that the red calf gave food to Rushen Coatie, and told her
mother. So her mother went to the king and told him she was longing to
have a sweetbread from a red calf. Then the king sent for his butcher,
and had the little red calf killed. And when Rushen Coatie heard of it,
she sate down and wept by its side, but the dead calf said:
     "Take me up, bone by bone,
      And put me beneath yon grey stone;
      When there is aught you want
      Tell it me, and that I'll grant."
So she did so, but could not find the shank-bone of the calf.
Now the very next Sunday was Yuletide, and all the folk were going to
church in their best clothes, so Rushen Coatie said: "Oh! I should like
to go to church, too," but the three ugly sisters said: "What would you
do at the church, you nasty thing? You must bide at home and make the
dinner." And the king's wife said: "And this is what you must make the
soup of, a thimbleful of water, a grain of barley, and a crumb of
bread."
When they all went to church, Rushen Coatie sat down and wept, but
looking up, who should she see coming in limping, lamping, with a shank
wanting, but the dear red calf? And the red calf said to her: "Do not
sit there weeping, but go, put on these clothes, and above all, put on
this pair of glass slippers, and go your way to church."
"But what will become of the dinner?" said Rushen Coatie.
"Oh, do not fash about that," said the red calf, "all you have to do is
to say to the fire:
     "'Every peat make t'other burn,
       Every spit make t'other turn,
       Every pot make t'other play,
       Till I come from church this good Yuleday,'
and be off to church with you. But mind you come home first."
So Rushen Coatie said this, and went off to church, and she was the
grandest and finest lady there. There happened to be a young prince
there, and he fell at once in love with her. But she came away before
service was over, and was home before the rest, and had off her fine
clothes and on with her rushen coatie, and she found the calf had
covered the table, and the dinner was ready, and everything was in good
order when the rest came home. The three sisters said to Rushen Coatie:
"Eh, lassie, if you had seen the bonny fine lady in church to-day, that
the young prince fell in love with!" Then she said: "Oh! I wish you
would let me go with you to the church to-morrow," for they used to go
three days together to church at Yuletide.
But they said: "What should the like of you do at church, nasty thing?
The kitchen nook is good enough for you."
So the next day they all went to church, and Rushen Coatie was left
behind, to make dinner out of a thimbleful of water, a grain of barley,
a crumb of bread, and a thread of meat. But the red calf came to her
help again, gave her finer clothes than before, and she went to church,
where all the world was looking at her, and wondering where such a grand
lady came from, and the prince fell more in love with her than ever, and
tried to find out where she went to. But she was too quick for him, and
got home long before the rest, and the red calf had the dinner all
ready.
The next day the calf dressed her in even grander clothes than before,
and she went to the church. And the young prince was there again, and
this time he put a guard at the door to keep her, but she took a hop and
a run and jumped over their heads, and as she did so, down fell one of
her glass slippers. She didn't wait to pick it up, you may be sure, but
off she ran home, as fast as she could go, on with the rushen coatie,
and the calf had all things ready.
Then the young prince put out a proclamation that whoever could put on
the glass slipper should be his bride. All the ladies of his court went
and tried to put on the slipper. And they tried and tried and tried, but
it was too small for them all. Then he ordered one of his ambassadors to
mount a fleet horse and ride through the kingdom and find an owner for
the glass shoe. He rode and he rode to town and castle, and made all the
ladies try to put on the shoe. Many a one tried to get it on that she
might be the prince's bride. But no, it wouldn't do, and many a one
wept, I warrant, because she couldn't get on the bonny glass shoe. The
ambassador rode on and on till he came at the very last to the house
where there were the three ugly sisters. The first two tried it and it
wouldn't do, and the queen, mad with spite, hacked off the toes and
heels of the third sister, and she could then put the slipper on, and
the prince was brought to marry her, for he had to keep his promise. The
ugly sister was dressed all in her best and was put up behind the prince
on horseback, and off they rode in great gallantry. But ye all know,
pride must have a fall, for as they rode along a raven sang out of a
bush--
     "Hackèd Heels and Pinchèd Toes
      Behind the young prince rides,
      But Pretty Feet and Little Feet
      Behind the cauldron bides."
"What's that the birdie sings?" said the young prince.
"Nasty, lying thing," said the step-sister, "never mind what it says."
But the prince looked down and saw the slipper dripping with blood, so
he rode back and put her down. Then he said, "There must be some one
that the slipper has not been tried on."
"Oh, no," said they, "there's none but a dirty thing that sits in the
kitchen nook and wears a rushen coatie."
But the prince was determined to try it on Rushen Coatie, but she ran
away to the grey stone, where the red calf dressed her in her bravest
dress, and she went to the prince and the slipper jumped out of his
pocket on to her foot, fitting her without any chipping or paring. So
the prince married her that very day, and they lived happy ever after.
The King o' the Cats
One winter's evening the sexton's wife was sitting by the fireside with
her big black cat, Old Tom, on the other side, both half asleep and
waiting for the master to come home. They waited and they waited, but
still he didn't come, till at last he came rushing in, calling out,
"Who's Tommy Tildrum?" in such a wild way that both his wife and his cat
stared at him to know what was the matter.
"Why, what's the matter?" said his wife, "and why do you want to know
who Tommy Tildrum is?"
"Oh, I've had such an adventure. I was digging away at old Mr. Fordyce's
grave when I suppose I must have dropped asleep, and only woke up by
hearing a cat's Miaou."
"Miaou!" said Old Tom in answer.
"Yes, just like that! So I looked over the edge of the grave, and what
do you think I saw?"
"Now, how can I tell?" said the sexton's wife.
"Why, nine black cats all like our friend Tom here, all with a white
spot on their chestesses. And what do you think they were carrying? Why,
a small coffin covered with a black velvet pall, and on the pall was a
small coronet all of gold, and at every third step they took they cried
all together, Miaou--"
"Miaou!" said Old Tom again.
"Yes, just like that!" said the Sexton; "and as they came nearer and
nearer to me I could see them more distinctly, because their eyes shone
out with a sort of green light. Well, they all came towards me, eight of
them carrying the coffin, and the biggest cat of all walking in front
for all the world like--but look at our Tom, how he's looking at me.
You'd think he knew all I was saying."
"Go on, go on," said his wife; "never mind Old Tom."
"Well, as I was a-saying, they came towards me slowly and solemnly, and
at every third step crying all together, Miaou!--"
"Yes, just like that, till they came and stood right opposite Mr.
Fordyce's grave, where I was, when they all stood still and looked
straight at me. I did feel queer, that I did! But look at Old Tom; he's
looking at me just like they did."
"Where was I? Oh, they all stood still looking at me, when the one that
wasn't carrying the coffin came forward and, staring straight at me,
said to me--yes, I tell 'ee, said to me, with a squeaky voice, 'Tell
Tom Tildrum that Tim Toldrum's dead,' and that's why I asked you if you
knew who Tom Tildrum was, for how can I tell Tom Tildrum Tim Toldrum's
dead if I don't know who Tom Tildrum is?"
"Look at Old Tom, look at Old Tom!" screamed his wife.
And well he might look, for Tom was swelling and Tom was staring, and at
last Tom shrieked out, "What--old Tim dead! then I'm the King o' the
Cats!" and rushed up the chimney and was never more seen.
Tamlane
Young Tamlane was son of Earl Murray, and Burd Janet was daughter of
Dunbar, Earl of March. And when they were young they loved one another
and plighted their troth. But when the time came near for their
marrying, Tamlane disappeared, and none knew what had become of him.
Many, many days after he had disappeared, Burd Janet was wandering in
Carterhaugh Wood, though she had been warned not to go there. And as she
wandered she plucked the flowers from the bushes. She came at last to a
bush of broom and began plucking it. She had not taken more than three
flowerets when by her side up started young Tamlane.
"Where come ye from, Tamlane, Tamlane?" Burd Janet said; "and why have
you been away so long?"
"From Elfland I come," said young Tamlane. "The Queen of Elfland has
made me her knight."
"But how did you get there, Tamlane?" said Burd Janet.
"I was hunting one day, and as I rode widershins round yon hill, a deep
drowsiness fell upon me, and when I awoke, behold! I was in Elfland.
Fair is that land and gay, and fain would I stop but for thee and one
other thing. Every seven years the Elves pay their tithe to the Nether
world, and for all the Queen makes much of me, I fear it is myself that
will be the tithe."
"Oh can you not be saved? Tell me if aught I can do will save you,
Tamlane?"
"One only thing is there for my safety. To-morrow night is Hallowe'en,
and the fairy court will then ride through England and Scotland, and if
you would borrow me from Elfland you must take your stand by Miles Cross
between twelve and one o' the night, and with holy water in your hand
you must cast a compass all around you."
"But how shall I know you, Tamlane?" quoth Burd Janet, "amid so many
knights I've ne'er seen before?"
"The first court of Elves that come by let pass. The next court you
shall pay reverence to, but do naught nor say aught. But the third court
that comes by is the chief court of them, and at the head rides the
Queen of all Elfland. And I shall ride by her side upon a milk-white
steed with a star in my crown; they give me this honour as being a
christened knight. Watch my hands, Janet, the right one will be gloved
but the left one will be bare, and by that token you will know me."
"But how to save you, Tamlane?" quoth Burd Janet.
"You must spring upon me suddenly, and I will fall to the ground. Then
seize me quick, and whatever change befall me, for they will exercise
all their magic on me, cling hold to me till they turn me into red-hot
iron. Then cast me into this pool and I will be turned back into a
mother-naked man. Cast then your green mantle over me, and I shall be
yours, and be of the world again."
So Burd Janet promised to do all for Tamlane, and next night at midnight
she took her stand by Miles Cross and cast a compass round her with holy
water.
Soon there came riding by the Elfin court, first over the mound went a
troop on black steeds, and then another troop on brown. But in the third
court, all on milk-white steeds, she saw the Queen of Elfland, and by
her side a knight with a star in his crown, with right hand gloved and
the left bare. Then she knew this was her own Tamlane, and springing
forward she seized the bridle of the milk-white steed and pulled its
rider down. And as soon as he had touched the ground she let go the
bridle and seized him in her arms.
"He's won, he's won amongst us all," shrieked out the eldritch crew, and
all came around her and tried their spells on young Tamlane.
First they turned him in Janet's arms like frozen ice, then into a huge
flame of roaring fire. Then, again, the fire vanished and an adder was
skipping through her arms, but still she held on; and then they turned
him into a snake that reared up as if to bite her, and yet she held on.
Then suddenly a dove was struggling in her arms, and almost flew away.
Then they turned him into a swan, but all was in vain, till at last he
was turned into a red-hot glaive, and this she cast into a well of water
and then he turned back into a mother-naked man. She quickly cast her
green mantle over him, and young Tamlane was Burd Janet's for ever.
Then sang the Queen of Elfland as the court turned away and began to
resume its march:
     "She that has borrowed young Tamlane
       Has gotten a stately groom,
     She's taken away my bonniest knight,
       Left nothing in his room.
     "But had I known, Tamlane, Tamlane,
       A lady would borrow thee,
     I'd hae ta'en out thy two grey eyne,
       Put in two eyne of tree.
     "Had I but known, Tamlane, Tamlane,
       Before we came from home,
     I'd hae ta'en out thy heart o' flesh,
       Put in a heart of stone.
     "Had I but had the wit yestreen
       That I have got to-day,
     I'd paid the Fiend seven times his teind
       Ere you'd been won away."
And then the Elfin court rode away, and Burd Janet and young Tamlane
went their way homewards and were soon after married after young Tamlane
had again been sained by the holy water and made Christian once more.
The Stars in the Sky
Once on a time and twice on a time, and all times together as ever I
heard tell of, there was a tiny lassie who would weep all day to have
the stars in the sky to play with; she wouldn't have this, and she
wouldn't have that, but it was always the stars she would have. So one
fine day off she went to find them. And she walked and she walked and
she walked, till by-and-by she came to a mill-dam.
"Goode'en to ye," says she, "I'm seeking the stars in the sky to play
with. Have you seen any?"
"Oh, yes, my bonnie lassie," said the mill-dam. "They shine in my own
face o' nights till I can't sleep for them. Jump in and perhaps you'll
find one."
So she jumped in, and swam about and swam about and swam about, but
ne'er a one could she see. So she went on till she came to a brooklet.
"Goode'en to ye, Brooklet, Brooklet," says she; "I'm seeking the stars
in the sky to play with. Have you seen any?"
"Yes, indeed, my bonny lassie," said the Brooklet. "They glint on my
banks at night. Paddle about, and maybe you'll find one."
So she paddled and she paddled and she paddled, but ne'er a one did she
find. So on she went till she came to the Good Folk.
"Goode'en to ye, Good Folk," says she; "I'm looking for the stars in the
sky to play with. Have ye seen e'er a one?"
"Why, yes, my bonny lassie," said the Good Folk. "They shine on the
grass here o' night. Dance with us, and maybe you'll find one."
And she danced and she danced and she danced, but ne'er a one did she
see. So down she sate; I suppose she wept.
"Oh dearie me, oh dearie me," says she, "I've swam and I've paddled and
I've danced, and if ye'll not help me I shall never find the stars in
the sky to play with."
But the Good Folk whispered together, and one of them came up to her and
took her by the hand and said, "If you won't go home to your mother, go
forward, go forward; mind you take the right road. Ask Four Feet to
carry you to No Feet at all, and tell No Feet at all to carry you to the
stairs without steps, and if you can climb that--"
"Oh, shall I be among the stars in the sky then?" cried the lassie.
"If you'll not be, then you'll be elsewhere," said the Good Folk, and
set to dancing again.
So on she went again with a light heart, and by-and-by she came to a
saddled horse, tied to a tree.
"Goode'en to ye, Beast," said she; "I'm seeking the stars in the sky to
play with. Will you give me a lift, for all my bones are an-aching."
"Nay," said the horse, "I know nought of the stars in the sky, and I'm
here to do the bidding of the Good Folk, and not my own will."
"Well," said she, "it's from the Good Folk I come, and they bade me tell
Four Feet to carry me to No Feet at all."
"That's another story," said he; "jump up and ride with me."
So they rode and they rode and they rode, till they got out of the
forest and found themselves at the edge of the sea. And on the water in
front of them was a wide glistening path running straight out towards a
beautiful thing that rose out of the water and went up into the sky, and
was all the colours in the world, blue and red and green, and wonderful
to look at.
"Now get you down," said the horse; "I've brought ye to the end of the
land, and that's as much as Four Feet can do. I must away home to my own
folk."
"But," said the lassie, "where's No Feet at all, and where's the stair
without steps?"
"I know not," said the horse, "it's none of my business neither. So
goode'en to ye, my bonny lassie;" and off he went.
So the lassie stood still and looked at the water, till a strange kind
of fish came swimming up to her feet.
"Goode'en to ye, big Fish," says she, "I'm looking for the stars in the
sky, and for the stairs that climb up to them. Will ye show me the way?"
"Nay," said the Fish, "I can't unless you bring me word from the Good
Folk."
"Yes, indeed," said she. "They said Four Feet would bring me to No Feet
at all, and No Feet at all would carry me to the stairs without steps."
"Ah, well," said the Fish; "that's all right then. Get on my back and
hold fast."
And off he went--Kerplash!--into the water, along the silver path,
towards the bright arch. And the nearer they came the brighter the sheen
of it, till she had to shade her eyes from the light of it.
And as they came to the foot of it, she saw it was a broad bright road,
sloping up and away into the sky, and at the far, far end of it she
could see wee shining things dancing about.
"Now," said the Fish, "here you are, and yon's the stair; climb up, if
you can, but hold on fast. I'll warrant you find the stair easier at
home than by such a way; 't was ne'er meant for lassies' feet to
travel;" and off he splashed through the water.
So she clomb and she clomb and she clomb, but ne'er a step higher did
she get: the light was before her and around her, and the water behind
her, and the more she struggled the more she was forced down into the
dark and the cold, and the more she clomb the deeper she fell.
But she clomb and she clomb, till she got dizzy in the light and
shivered with the cold, and dazed with the fear; but still she clomb,
till at last, quite dazed and silly-like, she let clean go, and sank
down--down--down.
And bang she came on to the hard boards, and found herself sitting,
weeping and wailing, by the bedside at home all alone.
News!
MR. G. Ha! Steward, how are you, my old boy? How do things go on at
home?
STEWARD. Bad enough, your honour; the magpie's dead!
MR. G. Poor mag! so he's gone. How came he to die?
STEWARD. Over-ate himself, Sir.
MR. G. Did he indeed? a greedy dog. Why, what did he get that he liked
so well?
STEWARD. Horseflesh; he died of eating horseflesh.
MR. G. How came he to get so much horseflesh?
STEWARD. All your father's horses, Sir.
MR. G. What! are they dead too?
STEWARD. Ay, Sir; they died of over-work.
MR. G. And why were they over-worked?
STEWARD. To carry water, Sir.
MR. G. To carry water, and what were they carrying water for?
STEWARD. Sure, Sir, to put out the fire.
MR. G. Fire! what fire?
STEWARD. Your father's house is burned down to the ground.
MR. G. My father's house burnt down! and how came it to be on fire?
STEWARD. I think, Sir, it must have been the torches.
MR G. Torches! what torches?
STEWARD. At your mother's funeral.
MR. G. My mother dead?
STEWARD. Ay, poor lady, she never looked up after it.
MR. G. After what?
STEWARD. The loss of your father.
MR. G. My father gone too?
STEWARD. Yes, poor gentleman, he took to his bed as soon as he heard of
it.
MR. G. Heard of what?
STEWARD. The bad news, an' it please your honour.
MR. G. What? more miseries, more bad news!
STEWARD. Yes, Sir, your bank has failed, your credit is lost and you're
not worth a shilling in the world. I make bold, Sir, to come and wait on
you about it; for I thought you would like to hear the news.
Puddock, Mousie, and Ratton
     There lived a Puddock in a well,
     And a merry Mousie in a mill.
     Puddock he would a-wooing rid
     Sword and pistol by his side.
     Puddock came to the Mousie's inn,
     "Mistress Mousie, are you within?"
       MOUSIE.
     "Yes, kind Sir, I am within,
     Softly do I sit and spin."
       PUDDOCK.
     "Madam, I am come to woo,
     Marriage I must have of you."
     "Marriage I will grant you none
     Till Uncle Ratton he comes home."
     "See, Uncle Ratton's now come in
     Then go and bask the bride within."
     Who is it that sits next the wall
     But Lady Mousie both slim and small?
     Who is it that sits next the bride
     But Lord Puddock with yellow side?
     But soon came Duckie and with her Sir Drake;
     Duckie takes Puddock and makes him squeak.
     Then came in the old carl cat
     With a fiddle on his back:
     "Do ye any music lack?"
     Puddock he swam down the brook,
     Sir Drake he catched him in his fluke.
     The cat he pulled Lord Ratton down,
     The kittens they did claw his crown.
     But Lady Mousie, so slim and small,
     Crept into a hole beneath the wall;
     "Squeak," quoth she, "I'm out of it all."
The Little Bull-Calf
Centuries of years ago, when almost all this part of the country was
wilderness, there was a little boy, who lived in a poor bit of property
and his father gave him a little bull-calf, and with it he gave him
everything he wanted for it.
But soon after his father died, and his mother got married again to a
man that turned out to be a very vicious step-father, who couldn't abide
the little boy. So at last the step-father said: "If you bring that
bull-calf into this house, I'll kill it." What a villain he was, wasn't
he?
Now this little boy used to go out and feed his bull-calf every day with
barley bread, and when he did so this time, an old man came up to
him--we can guess who that was, eh?--and said to him: "You and your
bull-calf had better go away and seek your fortune."
So he went on and he went on and he went on, as far as I could tell you
till to-morrow night, and he went up to a farmhouse and begged a crust
of bread, and when he got back he broke it in two and gave half of it to
the bull-calf. And he went to another house and begged a bit of cheese
crud, and when he went back he wanted to give half of it to the
bull-calf. "No," says the bull-calf, "I'm going across the field, into
the wild-wood wilderness country, where there'll be tigers, leopards,
wolves, monkeys, and a fiery dragon, and I'll kill them all except the
fiery dragon, and he'll kill me."
The little boy did cry, and said: "Oh, no, my little bull-calf; I hope
he won't kill you."
"Yes, he will," said the little bull-calf, "so you climb up that tree,
so that no one can come nigh you but the monkeys, and if they come the
cheese crud will save you. And when I'm killed, the dragon will go away
for a bit, then you must come down the tree and skin me, and take out my
bladder and blow it out, and it will kill everything you hit with it. So
when the fiery dragon comes back, you hit it with my bladder and cut its
tongue out."
(We know there were fiery dragons in those days, like George and his
dragon in the legend; but, there! it's not the same world nowadays. The
world is turned topsy-turvy since then, like as if you'd turn it over
with a spade!)
Of course, he did all the little bull-calf told him. He climbed up the
tree, and the monkeys climbed up the tree after him. But he held the
cheese crud in his hand, and said: "I'll squeeze your heart like the
flint-stone." So the monkey cocked his eye as much as to say: "If you
can squeeze a flint-stone to make the juice come out of it, you can
squeeze me." But he didn't say anything, for a monkey's cunning, but
down he went. And all the while the little bull-calf was fighting all
the wild beasts on the ground, and the little lad was clapping his hands
up the tree, and calling out: "Go in, my little bull-calf! Well fought,
little bull-calf!" And he mastered everything except the fiery dragon,
but the fiery dragon killed the little bull-calf.
But the lad waited and waited till he saw the dragon go away, then he
came down and skinned the little bull-calf, and took out its bladder and
went after the dragon. And as he went on, what should he see but a
king's daughter, staked down by the hair of her head, for she had been
put there for the dragon to destroy her.
So he went up and untied her hair, but she said: "My time has come for
the dragon to destroy me; go away, you can do no good." But he said:
"No! I can master it, and I won't go"; and for all her begging and
praying he would stop.
And soon he heard it coming, roaring and raging from afar off, and at
last it came near, spitting fire, and with a tongue like a great spear,
and you could hear it roaring for miles, and it was making for the place
where the king's daughter was staked down. But when it came up to them,
the lad just hit it on the head with the bladder and the dragon fell
down dead, but before it died, it bit off the little boy's forefinger.
[Illustration: THE LITTLE BULL-CALF]
Then the lad cut out the dragon's tongue and said to the king's
daughter: "I've done all I can, I must leave you." And sorry she was he
had to go, and before he went she tied a diamond ring in his hair, and
said good-bye to him.
By-and-by, who should come along but the old king, lamenting and
weeping, expecting to see nothing of his daughter but the prints of the
place where she had been. But he was surprised to find her there alive
and safe, and he said: "How came you to be saved?" So she told him how
she had been saved, and he took her home to his castle again.
Well, he put it into all the papers to find out who saved his daughter,
and who had the dragon's tongue and the princess's diamond ring, and was
without his forefinger. Whoever could show these signs should marry his
daughter and have his kingdom after his death. Well, any number of
gentlemen came from all parts of England, with forefingers cut off, and
with diamond rings and all kinds of tongues, wild beasts' tongues and
foreign tongues. But they couldn't show any dragons' tongues, so they
were turned away.
At last the little boy turned up, looking very ragged and desolated
like, and the king's daughter cast her eye on him, till her father grew
very angry and ordered them to turn the little beggar boy away.
"Father," says she; "I know something of that boy."
Well, still the fine gentlemen came, bringing up their dragons' tongues
that weren't dragons' tongues, and at last the little boy came up,
dressed a little better. So the old king says: "I see you've got an eye
on that boy. If it has to be him it must be him." But all the others
were fit to kill him, and cried out: "Pooh, pooh, turn that boy out, it
can't be him." But the king said: "Now, my boy, let's see what you have
to show." Well, he showed the diamond ring with her name on it, and the
fiery dragon's tongue. How the others were thunderstruck when he showed
his proofs! But the king told him: "You shall have my daughter and my
estate."
So he married the princess, and afterwards got the king's estate. Then
his step-father came and wanted to own him, but the young king didn't
know such a man.
The Wee, Wee Mannie
Once upon a time, when all big folks were wee ones and all lies were
true, there was a wee, wee Mannie that had a big, big Coo. And out he
went to milk her of a morning, and said--
     "Hold still, my Coo, my hinny,
        Hold still, my hinny, my Coo,
      And ye shall have for your dinner
        What but a milk white doo."
But the big, big Coo wouldn't hold still. "Hout!" said the wee, wee
Mannie--
     "Hold still, my Coo, my dearie,
        And fill my bucket wi' milk,
      And if ye 'll be no contrairy
        I'll gi'e ye a gown o' silk."
But the big, big Coo wouldn't hold still. "Look at that, now!" said the
wee, wee Mannie--
     "What's a wee, wee mannie to do,
      Wi' such a big contrairy Coo?"
So off he went to his mother at the house. "Mother," said he, "Coo
won't stand still, and wee, wee Mannie can't milk big, big Coo."
"Hout!" says his mother, "take stick and beat Coo."
So off he went to get a stick from the tree, and said--
     "Break, stick, break,
      And I'll gi'e ye a cake."
But the stick wouldn't break, so back he went to the house. "Mother,"
says he, "Coo won't hold still, stick won't break, wee, wee Mannie can't
beat big, big Coo."
"Hout!" says his mother, "go to the Butcher and bid him kill Coo."
So off he went to the Butcher, and said--
     "Butcher, kill the big, big Coo,
      She'll gi'e us no more milk noo."
But the Butcher wouldn't kill the Coo without a silver penny, so back
the Mannie went to the house. "Mother," says he, "Coo won't hold still,
stick won't break, Butcher won't kill without a silver penny, and wee,
wee Mannie can't milk big, big Coo."
"Well," said his mother, "go to the Coo and tell her there's a weary,
weary lady with long yellow hair weeping for a cup o' milk."
So off he went and told the Coo, but she wouldn't hold still, so back he
went and told his mother.
"Well," said she, "tell the Coo there's a fine, fine laddie from the
wars sitting by the weary, weary lady with golden hair, and she weeping
for a sup o' milk."
"Well," said his mother, "tell the big, big Coo there's a sharp, sharp
sword at the belt of the fine, fine laddie from the wars who sits beside
the weary, weary lady with the golden hair, and she weeping for a sup o'
milk."
And he told the big, big Coo, but she wouldn't hold still.
Then said his mother, "Run quick and tell her that her head's going to
be cut off by the sharp, sharp sword in the hands of the fine, fine
laddie, if she doesn't give the sup o' milk the weary, weary lady weeps
for."
And wee, wee Mannie went off and told the big, big Coo.
And when Coo saw the glint of the sharp, sharp sword in the hand of the
fine, fine laddie come from the wars, and the weary, weary lady weeping
for a sup o' milk, she reckoned she'd better hold still; so wee, wee
Mannie milked big, big Coo, and the weary, weary lady with the golden
hair hushed her weeping and got her sup o' milk, and the fine, fine
laddie new come from the wars put by his sharp, sharp sword, and all
went well that didn't go ill.
Habetrot and Scantlie Mab
A woman had one fair daughter, who loved play better than work,
wandering in the meadows and lanes better than the spinning-wheel and
distaff. The mother was heartily vexed at this, for in those days no
lassie had any chance of a good husband unless she was an industrious
spinster. So she coaxed, threatened, even beat her daughter, but all to
no purpose; the girl remained what her mother called her, "an idle
cuttie."
At last, one spring morning, the gudewife gave her seven heads of lint,
saying she would take no excuse; they must be returned in three days
spun into yarn. The girl saw her mother was in earnest, so she plied her
distaff as well as she could; but her hands were all untaught, and by
the evening of the second day only a very small part of her task was
done. She cried herself to sleep that night, and in the morning,
throwing aside her work in despair, she strolled out into the fields,
all sparkling with dew. At last she reached a knoll, at whose feet ran a
little burn, shaded with woodbine and wild roses; and there she sat
down, burying her face in her hands. When she looked up, she was
surprised to see by the margin of the stream an old woman, quite
unknown to her, drawing out the thread as she basked in the sun. There
was nothing very remarkable in her appearance, except the length and
thickness of her lips, only she was seated on a self-bored stone. The
girl rose, went to the good dame, and gave her a friendly greeting, but
could not help inquiring "What makes you so long lipped?"
"Spinning thread, my hinnie," said the old woman, pleased with her. "I
wet my fingers with my lips, as I draw the thread from the distaff."
"Ah!" said the girl, "I should be spinning too, but it's all to no
purpose. I shall ne'er do my task:" on which the old woman proposed to
do it for her. Overjoyed, the maiden ran to fetch her lint, and placed
it in her new friend's hand, asking where she should call for the yarn
in the evening; but she received no reply; the old woman passed away
from her among the trees and bushes. The girl, much bewildered, wandered
about a little, sat down to rest, and finally fell asleep by the little
knoll.
When she awoke she was surprised to find that it was evening. Causleen,
the evening star, was beaming with silvery light, soon to be lost in the
moon's splendour. While watching these changes, the maiden was startled
by the sound of an uncouth voice, which seemed to issue from below the
self-bored stone, close beside her. She laid her ear to the stone and
heard the words: "Hurry up, Scantlie Mab, for I've promised the yarn and
Habetrot always keeps her promise." Then looking down the hole saw her
friend, the old dame, walking backwards and forwards in a deep cavern
among a group of spinsters all seated on colludie stones, and busy with
distaff and spindle. An ugly company they were, with lips more or less
disfigured, like old Habetrot's. Another of the sisterhood, who sat in a
distant corner reeling the yarn, was marked, in addition, by grey eyes,
which seemed starting from her head, and a long hooked nose.
While the girl was still watching, she heard Habetrot address this dame
by the name of Scantlie Mab, and say, "Bundle up the yarn, it is time
the young lassie should give it to her mother." Delighted to hear this,
the girl got up and returned homewards. Habetrot soon overtook her, and
placed the yarn in her hands. "Oh, what can I do for ye in return?"
exclaimed she, in delight. "Nothing--nothing," replied the dame; "but
dinna tell your mother who spun the yarn."
Scarcely believing her eyes, the girl went home, where she found her
mother had been busy making sausters, and hanging them up in the chimney
to dry, and then, tired out, had retired to rest. Finding herself very
hungry after her long day on the knoll, the girl took down pudding after
pudding, fried and ate them, and at last went to bed too. The mother was
up first the next morning, and when she came into the kitchen and found
her sausters all gone, and the seven hanks of yarn lying beautifully
smooth and bright upon the table, she ran out of the house wildly,
crying out--
     "My daughter's spun seven, seven, seven,
      My daughter's eaten seven, seven, seven,
        And all before daylight."
A laird who chanced to be riding by, heard the exclamation, but could
not understand it; so he rode up and asked the gudewife what was the
matter, on which she broke out again--
      My daughter's eaten seven, seven, seven
before daylight; and if ye dinna believe me, why come in and see it."
The laird, he alighted and went into the cottage, where he saw the yarn,
and admired it so much he begged to see the spinner.
The mother dragged in her girl. He vowed he was lonely without a wife,
and had long been in search of one who was a good spinner. So their
troth was plighted, and the wedding took place soon afterwards, though
the bride was in great fear that she should not prove so clever at her
spinning-wheel as he expected. But old Dame Habetrot came to her aid.
"Bring your bonny bridegroom to my cell," said she to the young bride
soon after her marriage; "he shall see what comes o' spinning, and never
will he tie you to the spinning-wheel."
Accordingly the bride led her husband the next day to the flowery knoll,
and bade him look through the self-bored stone. Great was his surprise
to behold Habetrot dancing and jumping over her rock, singing all the
time this ditty to her sisterhood, while they kept time with their
spindles:--
     "We who live in dreary den,
        Are both rank and foul to see?
      Hidden from the glorious sun,
        That teems the fair earth's canopie:
      Ever must our evenings lone
      Be spent on the colludie stone.
     "Cheerless is the evening grey
        When Causleen hath died away,
      But ever bright and ever fair
        Are they who breathe this evening air,
      And lean upon the self-bored stone
      Unseen by all but me alone."
The song ended, Scantlie Mab asked Habetrot what she meant by the last
line, "Unseen by all but we alone."
"There is one," replied Habetrot, "whom I bid to come here at this
hour, and he has heard my song through the self-bored stone." So saying
she rose, opened another door, which was concealed by the roots of an
old tree, and invited the pair to come in and see her family.
The laird was astonished at the weird-looking company, as he well might
be, and inquired of one after another the cause of their strange lips.
In a different tone of voice, and with a different twist of the mouth,
each answered that it was occasioned by spinning. At least they tried to
say so, but one grunted out "Nakasind," and another "Owkasaänd," while a
third murmured "O-a-a-send." All, however, made the bridegroom
understand what was the cause of their ugliness; while Habetrot slily
hinted that if his wife were allowed to spin, her pretty lips would grow
out of shape too, and her pretty face get an ugsome look. So before he
left the cave he vowed that his little wife should never touch a
spinning-wheel, and he kept his word. She used to wander in the meadows
by his side, or ride behind him over the hills, but all the flax grown
on his land was sent to old Habetrot to be converted into yarn.
Old Mother Wiggle-Waggle
     The fox and his wife they had a great strife,
     They never ate mustard in all their whole life;
     They ate their meat without fork or knife
       And loved to be picking a bone, e-ho!
     The fox went out, one still, clear night,
     And he prayed the moon to give him light,
     For he'd a long way to travel that night,
       Before he got back to his den-o!
     The fox when he came to yonder stile,
     He lifted his lugs and he listened a while!
     "Oh, ho!" said the fox, "it's but a short mile
       From this unto yonder wee town, e-ho!"
     And first he arrived at a farmer's yard,
     Where the ducks and the geese declared it was hard,
     That their nerves should be shaken and their rest should be marred
       By the visits of Mister Fox-o!
     The fox when he came to the farmer's gate,
     Who should he see but the farmer's drake;
     "I love you well for your master's sake,
       And long to be picking your bones, e-ho!"
     The grey goose she ran round the hay-stack,
     "Oh, ho!" said the fox, "you are very fat;
     You'll grease my beard and ride on my back
       From this into yonder wee town, e-ho!"
     Then he took the grey goose by her sleeve,
     And said: "Madam Grey Goose, by your leave
     I'll take you away without reprieve,
       And carry you back to my den-o!"
     And he seized the black duck by the neck,
     And slung him all across his back,
     The black duck cried out "quack, quack, quack,"
       With his legs all dangling down-o!
     Old Mother Wiggle-Waggle hopped out of bed,
     Out of the window she popped her old head;
     "Oh! husband, oh! husband, the grey goose is gone,
       And the fox is off to his den, oh!"
     Then the old man got up in his red cap,
     And swore he would catch the fox in a trap;
     But the fox was too cunning, and gave him the slip,
       And ran through the town, the town, oh!
     When he got to the top of the hill,
     He blew his trumpet both loud and shrill,
     For joy that he was safe and sound
       Through the town, oh!
     But at last he arrived at his home again,
     To his dear little foxes, eight, nine, ten,
     Says he "You're in luck, here's a fine fat duck
       With his legs all dangling down-o!"
     So he sat down together with his hungry wife,
     And they did very well without fork or knife,
     They never ate a better duck in all their life,
       And the little ones picked the bones-o!
Catskin
Well, there was once a gentleman who had fine lands and houses, and he
very much wanted to have a son to be heir to them. So when his wife
brought him a daughter, bonny as bonny could be, he cared nought for
her, and said, "Let me never see her face."
So she grew up a bonny girl, though her father never set eyes on her
till she was fifteen years old and was ready to be married. But her
father said, "Let her marry the first that comes for her." And when this
was known, who should be first but a nasty rough old man. So she didn't
know what to do, and went to the henwife and asked her advice. The
henwife said, "Say you will not take him unless they give you a coat of
silver cloth." Well, they gave her a coat of silver cloth, but she
wouldn't take him for all that, but went again to the henwife, who said,
"Say you will not take him unless they give you a coat of beaten gold."
Well, they gave her a coat of beaten gold, but still she would not take
him, but went to the henwife, who said, "Say you will not take him
unless they give you a coat made of the feathers of all the birds of
the air." So they sent a man with a great heap of pease; and the man
cried to all the birds of the air, "Each bird take a pea, and put down
a feather." So each bird took a pea and put down one of its feathers:
and they took all the feathers and made a coat of them and gave it to
her; but still she would not, but asked the henwife once again, who
said, "Say they must first make you a coat of catskin." So they made her
a coat of catskin; and she put it on, and tied up her other coats, and
ran away into the woods.
So she went along and went along and went along, till she came to the
end of the wood, and saw a fine castle. So there she hid her fine
dresses, and went up to the castle gates, and asked for work. The lady
of the castle saw her, and told her, "I'm sorry I have no better place,
but if you like you may be our scullion." So down she went into the
kitchen, and they called her Catskin, because of her dress. But the cook
was very cruel to her and led her a sad life.
Well, it happened soon after that the young lord of the castle was
coming home, and there was to be a grand ball in honour of the occasion.
And when they were speaking about it among the servants, "Dear me, Mrs.
Cook," said Catskin, "how much I should like to go."
"What! you dirty impudent slut," said the cook, "you go among all the
fine lords and ladies with your filthy catskin? a fine figure you'd
cut!" and with that she took a basin of water and dashed it into
Catskin's face. But she only briskly shook her ears, and said nothing.
When the day of the ball arrived, Catskin slipped out of the house and
went to the edge of the forest where she had hidden her dresses. So she
bathed herself in a crystal waterfall, and then put on her coat of
silver cloth, and hastened away to the ball. As soon as she entered all
were overcome by her beauty and grace, while the young lord at once lost
his heart to her. He asked her to be his partner for the first dance,
and he would dance with none other the live-long night.
When it came to parting time, the young lord said, "Pray tell me, fair
maid, where you live." But Catskin curtsied and said:
     "Kind sir, if the truth I must tell,
      At the sign of the 'Basin of Water' I dwell."
Then she flew from the castle and donned her catskin robe again, and
slipped into the scullery again, unbeknown to the cook.
The young lord went the very next day to his mother, the lady of the
castle, and declared he would wed none other but the lady of the silver
dress, and would never rest till he had found her. So another ball was
soon arranged for in hope that the beautiful maid would appear again. So
Catskin said to the cook, "Oh, how I should like to go!" Whereupon the
cook screamed out in a rage, "What, you, you dirty impudent slut! you
would cut a fine figure among all the fine lords and ladies." And with
that she up with a ladle and broke it across Catskin's back. But she
only shook her ears, and ran off to the forest, where she first of all
bathed, and then put on her coat of beaten gold, and off she went to the
ball-room.
As soon as she entered all eyes were upon her; and the young lord soon
recognised her as the lady of the "Basin of Water," and claimed her hand
for the first dance, and did not leave her till the last. When that
came, he again asked her where she lived. But all that she would say
was:
      At the sign of the 'Broken Ladle' I dwell."
and with that she curtsied, and flew from the ball, off with her golden
robe, on with her catskin, and into the scullery without the cook's
knowing.
Next day when the young lord could not find where was the sign of the
"Basin of Water," or of the "Broken Ladle," he begged his mother to have
another grand ball, so that he might meet the beautiful maid once more.
All happened as before. Catskin told the cook how much she would like to
go to the ball, the cook called her "a dirty slut," and broke the
skimmer across her head. But she only shook her ears, and went off to
the forest, where she first bathed in the crystal spring, and then
donned her coat of feathers, and so off to the ball-room.
When she entered every one was surprised at so beautiful a face and form
dressed in so rich and rare a dress; but the young lord soon recognised
his beautiful sweetheart, and would dance with none but her the whole
evening. When the ball came to an end, he pressed her to tell him where
she lived, but all she would answer was:
      At the sign of the 'Broken Skimmer' I dwell;"
and with that she curtsied, and was off to the forest. But this time the
young lord followed her, and watched her change her fine dress of
feathers for her catskin dress, and then he knew her for his own
scullery-maid.
Next day he went to his mother, the lady of the castle, and told her
that he wished to marry the scullery-maid, Catskin. "Never," said the
lady, and rushed from the room. Well, the young lord was so grieved at
that, that he took to his bed and was very ill. The doctor tried to cure
him, but he would not take any medicine unless from the hands of
Catskin. So the doctor went to the lady of the castle, and told her her
son would die if she did not consent to his marriage with Catskin. So
she had to give way, and summoned Catskin to her. But she put on her
coat of beaten gold, and went to the lady, who soon was glad to wed her
son to so beautiful a maid.
Well, so they were married, and after a time a dear little son came to
them, and grew up a bonny lad; and one day, when he was four years old,
a beggar woman came to the door, so Lady Catskin gave some money to the
little lord and told him to go and give it to the beggar woman. So he
went and gave it, but put it into the hand of the woman's child, who
leant forward and kissed the little lord. Now the wicked old cook--why
hadn't she been sent away?--was looking on, so she said, "Only see how
beggars' brats take to one another." This insult went to Catskin's
heart, so she went to her husband, the young lord, and told him all
about her father, and begged he would go and find out what had become of
her parents. So they set out in the lord's grand coach, and travelled
through the forest till they came to Catskin's father's house, and put
up at an inn near, where Catskin stopped, while her husband went to see
if her father would own her.
Now her father had never had any other child, and his wife had died; so
he was all alone in the world and sate moping and miserable. When the
young lord came in he hardly looked up, till he saw a chair close up to
him, and asked him: "Pray, sir, had you not once a young daughter whom
you would never see or own?"
The old gentleman said: "It is true; I am a hardened sinner. But I
would give all my worldly goods if I could but see her once before I
die." Then the young lord told him what had happened to Catskin, and
took him to the inn, and brought his father-in-law to his own castle,
where they lived happy ever afterwards.
Stupid's Cries
There was once a little boy, and his mother sent him to buy a sheep's
head and pluck; afraid he should forget it, the lad kept saying all the
way along:
     "Sheep's head and pluck!
      Sheep's head and pluck!"
Trudging along, he came to a stile; but in getting over he fell and hurt
himself, and beginning to blubber, forgot what he was sent for. So he
stood a little while to consider: at last he thought he recollected it,
and began to repeat:
     "Liver and lights and gall and all!
      Liver and lights and gall and all!"
Away he went again, and came to where a man had a pain in his liver,
bawling out:
Whereon the man laid hold of him and beat him, bidding him say:
     "Pray God send no more!
      Pray God send no more!"
The youngster strode along, uttering these words, till he reached a
field where a hind was sowing wheat:
This was all his cry. So the sower began to thrash him, and charged him
to repeat:
     "Pray God send plenty more!
      Pray God send plenty more!"
Off the child scampered with these words in his mouth till he reached a
churchyard and met a funeral, but he went on with his:
The chief mourner seized and punished him, and bade him repeat:
     "Pray God send the soul to heaven!
      Pray God send the soul to heaven!"
Away went the boy, and met a dog and a cat going to be hung, but his cry
rang out:
The good folk nearly were furious, seized and struck him, charging him
to say:
     "A dog and a cat agoing to be hung!
      A dog and a cat agoing to be hung!"
This the poor fellow did, till he overtook a man and a woman going to be
married. "Oh! oh!" he shouted:
The man was enraged, as we may well think, gave him many a thump, and
ordered him to repeat:
     "I wish you much joy!
      I wish you much joy!"
This he did, jogging along, till he came to two labourers who had fallen
into a ditch. The lad kept bawling out:
This vexed one of the folk so sorely that he used all his strength,
scrambled out, beat the crier, and told him to say.
     "The one is out, I wish the other was!
      The one is out, I wish the other was!"
On went young 'un till he found a fellow with only one eye; but he kept
up his song:
This was too much for Master One-eye, who grabbed him and chastised him,
bidding him call:
     "The one side gives good light, I wish the other did!
      The one side gives good light, I wish the other did!"
So he did, to be sure, till he came to a house, one side of which was on
fire. The people here thought it was he who had set the place a-blazing,
and straightway put him in prison. The end was, the judge put on his
black cap, and condemned him to die.
The Lambton Worm
A wild young fellow was the heir of Lambton, the fine estate and hall by
the side of the swift-flowing Wear. Not a Mass would he hear in
Brugeford Chapel of a Sunday, but a-fishing he would go. And if he did
not haul in anything, his curses could be heard by the folk as they went
by to Brugeford.
Well, one Sunday morning he was fishing as usual, and not a salmon had
risen to him, his basket was bare of roach or dace. And the worse his
luck, the worse grew his language, till the passers-by were horrified at
his words as they went to listen to the Mass-priest.
At last young Lambton felt a mighty tug at his line. "At last," quoth
he, "a bite worth having!" and he pulled and he pulled, till what should
appear above the water but a head like an elf's, with nine holes on each
side of its mouth. But still he pulled till he had got the thing to
land, when it turned out to be a Worm of hideous shape. If he had cursed
before, his curses were enough to raise the hair on your head.
"What ails thee, my son?" said a voice by his side, "and what hast thou
caught, that thou shouldst stain the Lord's Day with such foul
language?"
Looking round, young Lambton saw a strange old man standing by him.
"Why, truly," he said, "I think I have caught the devil himself. Look
you and see if you know him."
But the stranger shook his head, and said, "It bodes no good to thee or
thine to bring such a monster to shore. Yet cast him not back into the
Wear; thou has caught him, and thou must keep him," and with that away
he turned, and was seen no more.
The young heir of Lambton took up the gruesome thing, and, taking it off
his hook, cast it into a well close by, and ever since that day that
well has gone by the name of the Worm Well.
For some time nothing more was seen or heard of the Worm, till one day
it had outgrown the size of the well, and came forth full-grown. So it
came forth from the well and betook itself to the Wear. And all day long
it would lie coiled round a rock in the middle of the stream, while at
night it came forth from the river and harried the country side. It
sucked the cows' milk, devoured the lambs, worried the cattle, and
frightened all the women and girls of the district, and then it would
retire for the rest of the night to the hill, still called the Worm
Hill, on the north side of the Wear, about a mile and a half from
Lambton Hall.
This terrible visitation brought young Lambton, of Lambton Hall, to his
senses. He took upon himself the vows of the Cross, and departed for the
Holy Land, in the hope that the scourge he had brought upon his district
would disappear. But the grisly Worm took no heed, except that it
crossed the river and came right up to Lambton Hall itself where the old
lord lived on all alone, his only son having gone to the Holy Land. What
to do? The Worm was coming closer and closer to the Hall; women were
shrieking, men were gathering weapons, dogs were barking and horses
neighing with terror. At last the steward called out to the dairy maids,
"Bring all your milk hither," and when they did so, and had brought all
the milk that the nine kye of the byre had yielded, he poured it all
into the long stone trough in front of the Hall.
The Worm drew nearer and nearer, till at last it came up to the trough.
But when it sniffed the milk, it turned aside to the trough and
swallowed all the milk up, and then slowly turned round and crossed the
river Wear, and coiled its bulk three times round the Worm Hill for the
night.
Henceforth the Worm would cross the river every day, and woe betide the
Hall if the trough contained the milk of less than nine kye. The Worm
would hiss, and would rave, and lash its tail round the trees of the
park, and in its fury it would uproot the stoutest oaks and the loftiest
firs. So it went on for seven years. Many tried to destroy the Worm, but
all had failed, and many a knight had lost his life in fighting with
the monster, which slowly crushed the life out of all that came near it.
At last the Childe of Lambton came home to his father's Hall, after
seven long years spent in meditation and repentance on holy soil. Sad
and desolate he found his folk: the lands untilled, the farms deserted,
half the trees of the park uprooted, for none would stay to tend the
nine kye that the monster needed for his food each day.
The Childe sought his father, and begged his forgiveness for the curse
he had brought on the Hall.
"Thy sin is pardoned," said his father; "but go thou to the Wise Woman
of Brugeford, and find if aught can free us from this monster."
To the Wise Woman went the Childe, and asked her advice.
"'T is thy fault, O Childe, for which we suffer," she said; "be it thine
to release us."
"I would give my life," said the Childe.
"Mayhap thou wilt do so," said she. "But hear me, and mark me well.
Thou, and thou alone, canst kill the Worm. But, to this end, go thou to
the smithy and have thy armour studded with spear-heads. Then go to the
Worm's Rock in the Wear, and station thyself there. Then, when the Worm
comes to the Rock at dawn of day, try thy prowess on him, and God gi'e
thee a good deliverance."
"This I will do," said Childe Lambton.
"But one thing more," said the Wise Woman, going back to her cell. "If
thou slay the Worm, swear that thou wilt put to death the first thing
that meets thee as thou crossest again the threshold of Lambton Hall.
Do this, and all will be well with thee and thine. Fulfil not thou vow,
and none of the Lambtons, for generations three times three, shall die
in his bed. Swear, and fail not."
The Childe swore as the Wise Woman bid, and went his way to the smithy.
There he had his armour studded with spear-heads all over. Then he
passed his vigils in Brugeford Chapel, and at dawn of day took his post
on the Worm's Rock in the River Wear.
As dawn broke, the Worm uncoiled its snaky twine from around the hill,
and came to its rock in the river. When it perceived the Childe waiting
for it, it lashed the waters in its fury and wound its coils round the
Childe, and then attempted to crush him to death. But the more it
pressed, the deeper dug the spear-heads into its sides. Still it pressed
and pressed, till all the water around was crimsoned with its blood.
Then the Worm unwound itself, and left the Childe free to use his sword.
He raised it, brought it down, and cut the Worm in two. One half fell
into the river, and was carried swiftly away. Once more the head and the
remainder of the body encircled the Childe, but with less force, and the
spear-heads did their work. At last the Worm uncoiled itself, snorted
its last foam of blood and fire, and rolled dying into the river, and
was never seen more.
[Illustration: The Lambton Worm]
The Childe of Lambton swam ashore, and raising his bugle to his lips,
sounded its note thrice. This was the signal to the Hall, where the
servants and the old lord had shut themselves in to pray for the
Childe's success. When the third sound of the bugle was heard, they
were to release Boris, the Childe's favourite hound. But such was their
joy at learning of the Childe's safety and the Worm's defeat, that they
forgot orders, and when the Childe reached the threshold of the Hall his
old father rushed out to meet him, and would have clasped him to his
breast.
"The vow! the vow!" cried out the Childe of Lambton, and blew still
another blast upon his horn. This time the servants remembered, and
released Boris, who came bounding to his young master. The Childe raised
his shining sword, and severed the head of his faithful hound.
But the vow was broken, and for nine generations of men none of the
Lambtons died in his bed. The last of the Lambtons died in his carriage
as he was crossing Brugeford Bridge, one hundred and thirty years ago.
The Wise Men of Gotham
Of Buying of Sheep
There were two men of Gotham, and one of them was going to market to
Nottingham to buy sheep, and the other came from the market, and they
both met together upon Nottingham bridge.
"Where are you going?" said the one who came from Nottingham.
"Marry," said he that was going to Nottingham, "I am going to buy
sheep."
"Buy sheep?" said the other, "and which way will you bring them home?"
"Marry," said the other, "I will bring them over this bridge."
"By Robin Hood," said he that came from Nottingham, "but thou shalt
not."
"By Maid Marion," said he that was going thither, "but I will."
"You will not," said the one.
"I will."
Then they beat their staves against the ground one against the other, as
if there had been a hundred sheep between them.
"Hold in," said one; "beware lest my sheep leap over the bridge."
"I care not," said the other; "they shall not come this way."
"But they shall," said the other.
Then the other said: "If that thou make much to do, I will put my
fingers in thy mouth."
"Will you?" said the other.
Now, as they were at their contention, another man of Gotham came from
the market with a sack of meal upon a horse, and seeing and hearing his
neighbours at strife about sheep, though there were none between them,
said:
"Ah, fools! will you ever learn wisdom? Help me, and lay my sack upon my
shoulders."
They did so, and he went to the side of the bridge, unloosened the mouth
of the sack, and shook all his meal out into the river.
"Now, neighbours," he said, "how much meal is there in my sack?"
"Marry," said they, "there is none at all."
"Now, by my faith," said he, "even as much wit as is in your two heads
to stir up strife about a thing you have not."
Which was the wisest of these three persons, judge yourself.
Of Hedging a Cuckoo
Once upon a time the men of Gotham would have kept the Cuckoo so that
she might sing all the year, and in the midst of their town they made a
hedge round in compass and they got a Cuckoo, and put her into it, and
said, "Sing there all through the year, or thou shalt have neither meat
nor water." The Cuckoo, as soon as she perceived herself within the
hedge, flew away. "A vengeance on her!" said they. "We did not make our
hedge high enough."
Of Sending Cheeses
There was a man of Gotham who went to the market at Nottingham to sell
cheese, and as he was going down the hill to Nottingham bridge, one of
his cheeses fell out of his wallet and rolled down the hill. "Ah,
gaffer," said the fellow, "can you run to market alone? I will send one
after another after you."
Then he laid down his wallet and took out the cheeses, and rolled them
down the hill. Some went into one bush; and some went into another.
"I charge you all to meet me near the market-place;" and when the fellow
came to the market to meet his cheeses, he stayed there till the market
was nearly done. Then he went about to inquire of his friends and
neighbours, and other men, if they did see his cheeses come to the
market.
"Who should bring them?" said one of the market men.
"Marry, themselves," said the fellow; "they know the way well enough."
He said, "A vengeance on them all. I did fear, to see them run so fast,
that they would run beyond the market. I am now fully persuaded that
they must be now almost at York." Whereupon he forthwith hired a horse
to ride to York, to seek his cheeses where they were not, but to this
day no man can tell him of his cheeses.
Of Drowning Eels
When Good Friday came, the men of Gotham cast their heads together what
to do with their white herrings, their red herrings, their sprats, and
other salt fish. One consulted with the other, and agreed that such fish
should be cast into their pond (which was in the middle of the town),
that they might breed against the next year, and every man that had salt
fish left cast them into the pool.
"I have many white herrings," said one.
"I have many sprats," said another.
"I have many red herrings," said the other.
"I have much salt fish. Let all go into the pond or pool, and we shall
fare like lords next year."
At the beginning of next year following the men drew near the pond to
have their fish, and there was nothing but a great eel. "Ah," said they
all, "a mischief on this eel, for he has eaten up all our fish."
"What shall we do to him?" said one to the others.
"Kill him," said one.
"Chop him into pieces," said another. "Not so," said another; "let us
drown him."
"Be it so," said all. And they went to another pond, and cast the eel
into the pond. "Lie there and shift for yourself, for no help thou shalt
have from us;" and they left the eel to drown.
Of Sending Rent
Once on a time the men of Gotham had forgotten to pay their landlord.
One said to the other, "To-morrow is our pay-day, and what shall we find
to send our money to our landlord?"
The one said, "This day I have caught a hare, and he shall carry it, for
he is light of foot."
"Be it so," said all; "he shall have a letter and a purse to put our
money in, and we shall direct him the right way." So when the letters
were written and the money put in a purse, they tied it round the
hare's neck, saying, "First you go to Lancaster, then thou must go to
Loughborough, and Newarke is our landlord, and commend us to him and
there is his dues."
The hare, as soon as he was out of their hands, ran on along the country
way. Some cried, "Thou must go to Lancaster first."
"Let the hare alone," said another; "he can tell a nearer way than the
best of us all. Let him go."
Another said, "It is a subtle hare, let her alone; she will not keep the
highway for fear of dogs."
Of Counting
On a certain time there were twelve men of Gotham who went fishing, and
some went into the water and some on dry ground; and, as they were
coming back, one of them said, "We have ventured much this day wading; I
pray God that none of us that did come from home be drowned."
"Marry," said one, "let us see about that. Twelve of us came out," and
every man did count eleven, and the twelfth man did never count himself.
"Alas!" said one to another, "one of us is drowned." They went back to
the brook where they had been fishing, and looked up and down for him
that was drowned, and made great lamentation. A courtier came riding
by, and he did ask what they were seeking, and why they were so
sorrowful. "Oh," said they, "this day we came to fish in this brook, and
there were twelve of us, and one is drowned."
"Why," said the courtier, "count me how many of you there be," and one
counted eleven and did not count himself. "Well," said the courtier,
"what will you give me if I find the twelfth man?"
"Sir," said they, "all the money we have."
"Give me the money," said the courtier; and he began with the first, and
gave him a whack over the shoulders that he groaned, and said, "There is
one," and he served all of them that they groaned; but when he came to
the last he gave him a good blow, saying, "Here is the twelfth man."
"God bless you on your heart," said all the company; "you have found our
neighbour."
Princess of Canterbury
There lived formerly in the County of Cumberland a nobleman who had
three sons, two of whom were comely and clever youths, but the other a
natural fool, named Jack, who was generally engaged with the sheep: he
was dressed in a parti-coloured coat, and a steeple-crowned hat with a
tassel, as became his condition. Now the King of Canterbury had a
beautiful daughter, who was distinguished by her great ingenuity and
wit, and he issued a decree that whoever should answer three questions
put to him by the princess should have her in marriage, and be heir to
the crown at his decease. Shortly after this decree was published, news
of it reached the ears of the nobleman's sons, and the two clever ones
determined to have a trial, but they were sadly at a loss to prevent
their idiot brother from going with them. They could not, by any means,
get rid of him, and were compelled at length to let Jack accompany them.
They had not gone far, before Jack shrieked with laughter, saying, "I've
found an egg." "Put it in your pocket," said the brothers. A little
while afterwards, he burst out into another fit of laughter on finding a
crooked hazel stick, which he also put in his pocket; and a third time
he again laughed extravagantly because he found a nut. That also was put
with his other treasures.
When they arrived at the palace, they were immediately admitted on
mentioning the nature of their business, and were ushered into a room
where the princess and her suite were sitting. Jack, who never stood on
ceremony, bawled out, "What a troop of fair ladies we've got here!"
"Yes," said the princess, "we are fair ladies, for we carry fire in our
bosoms."
"Do you?" said Jack, "then roast me an egg," pulling out the egg from
his pocket.
"How will you get it out again?" said the princess.
"With a crooked stick," replied Jack, producing the hazel.
"Where did that come from?" said the princess.
"From a nut," answered Jack, pulling out the nut from his pocket. "I've
answered the three questions, and now I'll have the lady." "No, no,"
said the king, "not so fast. You have still an ordeal to go through. You
must come here in a week's time and watch for one whole night with the
princess, my daughter. If you can manage to keep awake the whole night
long you shall marry her next day."
"But if I can't?" said Jack.
"Then off goes your head," said the king. "But you need not try unless
you like."
Well, Jack went back home for a week, and thought over whether he should
try and win the princess. At last he made up his mind. "Well," said
Jack, "I'll try my vorton; zo now vor the king's daughter, or a
headless shepherd!"
And taking his bottle and bag, he trudged to the court. In his way
thither, he was obliged to cross a river, and pulling off his shoes and
stockings, while he was passing over he observed several pretty fish
bobbing against his feet; so he caught some and put them into his
pocket. When he reached the palace he knocked at the gate loudly with
his crook, and having mentioned the object of his visit, he was
immediately conducted to the hall where the king's daughter sat ready
prepared to see her lovers. He was placed in a luxurious chair, and rich
wines and spices were set before him, and all sorts of delicate meats.
Jack, unused to such fare, ate and drank plentifully, so that he was
nearly dozing before midnight.
"Oh, shepherd," said the lady, "I have caught you napping!"
"Noa, sweet ally, I was busy a-feeshing."
"A fishing," said the princess in the utmost astonishment: "Nay,
shepherd, there is no fish-pond in the hall."
"No matter vor that, I have been fishing in my pocket, and have just
caught one."
"Oh me!" said she, "let me see it."
The shepherd slyly drew the fish out of his pocket and pretending to
have caught it, showed it her, and she declared it was the finest she
ever saw.
About half an hour afterwards, she said, "Shepherd, do you think you
could get me one more?"
He replied, "Mayhap I may, when I have baited my hook;" and after a
little while he brought out another, which was finer than the first, and
the princess was so delighted that she gave him leave to go to sleep,
and promised to excuse him to her father.
In the morning the princess told the king, to his great astonishment,
that Jack must not be beheaded, for he had been fishing in the hall all
night; but when he heard how Jack had caught such beautiful fish out of
his pocket, he asked him to catch one in his own.
Jack readily undertook the task, and bidding the king lie down, he
pretended to fish in his pocket, having another fish concealed ready in
his hand, and giving him a sly prick with a needle, he held up the fish,
and showed it to the king.
His majesty did not much relish the operation, but he assented to the
marvel of it, and the princess and Jack were united the same day, and
lived for many years in happiness and prosperity.

There was once a woman who had three daughters, of whom the eldest was
named "One Eye," because she had only one eye in the middle of her
forehead. The second had two eyes, like other people, and she was called
"Two Eyes." The youngest had three eyes, two like her second sister, and
one in the middle of her forehead, like the eldest, and she bore the
name of "Three Eyes."
Now because little Two Eyes looked just like other people, her mother
and sisters could not endure her. They said to her, "You are not better
than common folks, with your two eyes; you don't belong to us."
So they pushed her about, and threw all their old clothes to her for her
to wear, and gave her only the pieces that were left to eat, and did
everything that they could to make her miserable. It so happened that
little Two Eyes was sent into the fields to take care of the goats, and
she was often very hungry, although her sisters had as much as they
liked to eat. So one day she seated herself on a mound in the field, and
began to weep and cry so bitterly that two little rivulets flowed from
her eyes. Once, in the midst of her sorrow she looked up, and saw a
woman standing near her who said, "What are you weeping for, little Two
Eyes?"
"I cannot help weeping," she replied; "for because I have two eyes, like
other people, my mother and sisters cannot bear me; they push me about
from one corner to another and make we wear their old clothes, and give
me nothing to eat but what is left, so that I am always hungry. To-day
they gave me so little that I am nearly starved."
"Dry up your tears, little Two Eyes," said the wise woman; "I will tell
you something to do which will prevent you from ever being hungry again.
You have only to say to your own goat:
  "'Little goat, if you're able,
  Pray deck out my table,'
"and immediately there will be a pretty little table before you full of
all sorts of good things for you to eat, as much as you like. And when
you have had enough, and you do not want the table any more, you need
only say:
  "'Little goat, when you're able,
  Remove my nice table,'
"and it will vanish from your eyes."
Then the wise woman went away. "Now," thought little Two Eyes, "I will
try if what she says is true, for I am very hungry," so she said:
  "Little goat, if you're able,
  Pray deck out my table."
The words were scarcely spoken, when a beautiful little table stood
really before her; it had a white cloth and plates, and knives and
forks, and silver spoons, and such a delicious dinner, smoking hot as if
it had just come from the kitchen. Then little Two Eyes sat down and
said the shortest grace she knew--"Pray God be our guest for all time.
Amen"--before she allowed herself to taste anything. But oh, how she did
enjoy her dinner! and when she had finished, she said, as the wise woman
had taught her:
  "Little goat, when you're able,
  Remove my nice table."
In a moment, the table and everything upon it had disappeared. "That is
a pleasant way to keep house," said little Two Eyes, and felt quite
contented and happy. In the evening, when she went home with the goat,
she found an earthenware dish with some scraps which her sisters had
left for her, but she did not touch them. The next morning she went away
with the goat, leaving them behind where they had been placed for her.
The first and second times that she did so, the sisters did not notice
it; but when they found it happened every day, they said one to the
other, "There is something strange about little Two Eyes, she leaves her
supper every day, and all that has been put for her has been wasted; she
must get food somewhere else."
So they determined to find out the truth, and they arranged that when
Two Eyes took her goat to the field, One Eye should go with her to take
particular notice of what she did, and discover if anything was brought
for her to eat and drink.
So when Two Eyes started with her goat, One Eye said to her, "I am going
with you to-day to see if the goat gets her food properly while you are
watching the rest."
But Two Eyes knew what she had in her mind. So she drove the goat into
the long grass, and said, "Come, One Eye, let us sit down here and rest,
and I will sing to you."
One Eye seated herself, and, not being accustomed to walk so far, or to
be out in the heat of the sun, she began to feel tired, and as little
Two Eyes kept on singing, she closed her one eye and fell fast asleep.
When Two Eyes saw this, she knew that One Eye could not betray her, so
she said:
  "Little goat, if you are able,
  Come and deck my pretty table."
She seated herself when it appeared, and ate and drank very quickly, and
when she had finished she said:
  "Little goat, when you are able,
  Come and clear away my table."
It vanished in the twinkling of an eye; and then Two Eyes woke up One
Eye, and said, "Little One Eye, you are a clever one to watch goats;
for, while you are asleep, they might be running all over the world.
Come, let us go home!"
So they went to the house, and little Two Eyes again left the scraps on
the dish untouched, and One Eye could not tell her mother whether little
Two Eyes had eaten anything in the field; for she said to excuse
herself, "I was asleep."
The next day the mother said to Three Eyes, "You must go to the field
this time, and find out whether there is anyone who brings food to
little Two Eyes; for she must eat and drink secretly."
So when little Two Eyes started with her goat, Three Eyes followed, and
said, "I am going with you to-day, to see if the goats are properly fed
and watched."
But Two Eyes knew her thoughts; so she led the goat through the long
grass to tire Three Eyes, and at last she said, "Let us sit down here
and rest, and I will sing to you, Three Eyes."
She was glad to sit down, for the walk and the heat of the sun had
really tired her; and, as her sister continued her song, she was obliged
to close two of her eyes, and they slept, but not the third. In fact,
Three Eyes was wide awake with one eye, and heard and saw all that Two
Eyes did; for poor little Two Eyes, thinking she was asleep, said her
speech to the goat, and the table came with all the good things on it,
and was carried away when Two Eyes had eaten enough; and the cunning
Three Eyes saw it all with her one eye. But she pretended to be asleep
when her sister came to wake her and told her she was going home.
That evening, when little Two Eyes again left the supper they placed
aside for her, Three Eyes said to her mother, "I know where the proud
thing gets her good eating and drinking;" and then she described all she
had seen in the field. "I saw it all with one eye," she said; "for she
had made my other two eyes close with her fine singing, but luckily the
one in my forehead remained open."
Then the envious mother cried out to poor little Two Eyes, "You wish to
have better food than we, do you? You shall lose your wish!" She took up
a butcher's knife, went out, and stuck the good little goat in the
heart, and it fell dead.
When little Two Eyes saw this, she went out into the field, seated
herself on a mound, and wept most bitter tears.
Presently the wise woman stood again before her, and said, "Little Two
Eyes, why do you weep?"
"Ah!" she replied, "I must weep. The goat, who every day spread my table
so beautifully, has been killed by my mother, and I shall have again to
suffer from hunger and sorrow."
"Little Two Eyes," said the wise woman, "I will give you some good
advice. Go home, and ask your sister to give you the inside of the
slaughtered goat, and then go and bury it in the ground in front of the
house-door."
On saying this the wise woman vanished.
Little Two Eyes went home quickly, and said to her sister, "Dear sister,
give me some part of my poor goat. I don't want anything valuable; only
give me the inside."
Her sister laughed, and said, "Of course you can have that, if you don't
want anything else."
So little Two Eyes took the inside; and in the evening, when all was
quiet, buried it in the ground outside the house-door, as the wise woman
had told her to do.
The next morning, when they all rose and looked out of the window, there
stood a most wonderful tree, with leaves of silver and apples of gold
hanging between them. Nothing in the wide world could be more beautiful
or more costly. They none of them knew how the tree could come there in
one night, excepting little Two Eyes. She supposed it had grown up from
the inside of the goat; for it stood over where she had buried it in the
earth.
Then said the mother to little One Eye, "Climb up, my child, and break
off some of the fruit from the tree."
One Eye climbed up, but when she tried to catch a branch and pluck one
of the apples, it escaped from her hand, and so it happened every time
she made the attempt, and, do what she would, she could not reach one.
"Three Eyes," said the mother, "climb up, and try what you can do;
perhaps you will be able to see better with your three eyes than One Eye
can."
One Eye slid down from the tree, and Three Eyes climbed up. But Three
Eyes was not more skilful; with all her efforts she could not draw the
branches, nor the fruit, near enough to pluck even a leaf, for they
sprang back as she put out her hand.
At last the mother was impatient, and climbed up herself, but with no
more success, for, as she appeared to grasp a branch, or fruit, her hand
closed upon thin air.
"May I try?" said little Two Eyes; "perhaps I may succeed."
"You, indeed!" cried her sisters; "you, with your two eyes, what can you
do?"
But Two Eyes climbed up, and the golden apples did not fly back from her
when she touched them, but almost laid themselves on her hand, and she
plucked them one after another, till she carried down her own little
apron full.
The mother took them from her, and gave them to her sisters, as she said
little Two Eyes did not handle them properly; but this was only from
jealousy, because little Two Eyes was the only one who could reach the
fruit, and she went into the house feeling more spiteful to her than
ever.
It happened that while all three sisters were standing under the tree
together a young knight rode by. "Run away, quick, and hide yourself,
little Two Eyes; hide yourself somewhere, for we shall be quite ashamed
for you to be seen." Then they pushed the poor girl, in great haste,
under an empty cask, which stood near the tree, and several of the
golden apples that she had plucked along with her.
As the knight came nearer they saw he was a handsome man; and presently
he halted, and looked with wonder and pleasure at the beautiful tree
with its silver leaves and golden fruit.
At last he spoke to the sisters, and asked: "To whom does this beautiful
tree belong? If a man possessed only one branch he might obtain all he
wished for in the world."
"This tree belongs to us," said the two sisters, "and we will break off
a branch for you if you like." They gave themselves a great deal of
trouble in trying to do as they offered; but all to no purpose, for the
branches and the fruit evaded their efforts, and sprung back at every
touch.
"This is wonderful," exclaimed the knight, "that the tree should belong
to you, and yet you are not able to gather even a branch."
They persisted, however, in declaring that the tree was their own
property. At this moment little Two Eyes, who was angry because her
sisters had not told the truth, caused two of the golden apples to slip
out from under the cask, and they rolled on till they reached the feet
of the knight's horse. When he saw them, he asked in astonishment where
they came from.
The two ugly maidens replied that they had another sister, but they
dared not let him see her, for she had only two eyes, like common
people, and was named little Two Eyes.
But the knight felt very anxious to see her, and called out, "Little Two
Eyes, come here." Then came Two Eyes, quite comforted, from the empty
cask, and the knight was astonished to find her so beautiful.
Then he said, "Little Two Eyes, can you break off a branch of the tree
for me?"
"Oh yes," she replied, "I can, very easily, for the tree belongs to me."
And she climbed up, and, without any trouble, broke off a branch with
its silver leaves and golden fruit and gave it to the knight.
He looked down at her as she stood by his horse, and said: "Little Two
Eyes, what shall I give you for this?"
"Ah!" she answered, "I suffer from hunger and thirst, and sorrow, and
trouble, from early morning till late at night; if you would only take
me with you, and release me, I should be so happy."
Then the knight lifted the little maiden on his horse, and rode home
with her to his father's castle. There she was given beautiful clothes
to wear, and as much to eat and drink as she wished, and as she grew up
the young knight loved her so dearly that they were married with great
rejoicings.
Now, when the two sisters saw little Two Eyes carried away by the
handsome young knight, they were overjoyed at their good fortune. "The
wonderful tree belongs to us now," they said; "even if we cannot break
off a branch, yet everybody who passes will stop to admire it, and make
acquaintance with us, and, who knows? we may get husbands after all."
But when they rose the next morning, lo! the tree had vanished, and with
it all their hopes. And on this very morning, when little Two Eyes
looked out of her chamber window of the castle, she saw, to her great
joy, that the tree had followed her.
Little Two Eyes lived for a long time in great happiness; but she heard
nothing of her sisters, till one day two poor women came to the castle,
to beg for alms. Little Two Eyes saw them, and, looking earnestly in
their faces, she recognised her two sisters, who had become so poor that
they were obliged to beg their bread from door to door.
But the good sister received them most kindly, and promised to take care
of them and give them all they wanted. And then they did indeed repent
and feel sorry for having treated her so badly in their youthful days.
THE MAGIC MIRROR
One day in the middle of winter, when the snowflakes fell from the sky
like feathers, a queen sat at a window netting. Her netting-needle was
of black ebony, and as she worked, and the snow glittered, she pricked
her finger, and three drops of blood fell into the snow. The red spots
looked so beautiful in the white snow that the queen thought to herself:
"Oh, if I only had a little child, I should like it to be as fair as
snow, as rosy as the red blood, and with hair and eyes as black as
ebony."
Very soon after this the queen had a little daughter who was very fair,
had rosy cheeks, and hair as black as ebony; and they gave her the name
of Snow-white. But at the birth of the little child the queen died.
When Snow-white was a year old, the king took another wife. She was very
handsome, but so proud and vain that she could not endure that anyone
should surpass her in beauty. She possessed a wonderful mirror, and when
she stood before it to look at herself she would say:
    "Mirror, mirror on the wall,
     Am I most beautiful of all?"
Then the mirror would reply:
  "Young queen, thou are so wondrous fair,
   None can with thee at all compare."
Then she would go away quite contented, for she knew the magic mirror
could speak only the truth.
Years went by, and as Snow-white grew up, she became day after day more
beautiful, till she reached the age of seven years, and then people
began to talk about her, and say that she would be more lovely even than
the queen herself. So the proud woman went to her magic looking-glass,
and asked:
But the mirror answered:
  "Queen, thou are lovely still to see,
   But Snow-white will be
   A thousand times more beautiful than thee."
Then the queen was terrified, and turned green and yellow with jealousy.
If she had caught sight of Snow-white at that moment, she would have
been ready to tear her heart out of her body, she hated the maiden so
fiercely.
And this jealousy and envy grew every day stronger and stronger in her
heart, like a disease, till she had no rest day or night.
At last she sent for a hunter, who lived near a forest, and said to him,
"Hunter, I want to get rid of that child. Take her out into the wood,
and if you bring me some proofs that she is dead, I will reward you
handsomely. Never let her appear before my eyes again."
So the hunter enticed the child into the wood; but when he took out his
hunting-knife to thrust into Snow-white's innocent heart, she fell on
her knees and wept, and said, "Ah, dear hunter, leave me my life; I will
run away into the wild wood, and never, never come home any more."
She looked so innocent and beautiful as she knelt, that the hunter's
heart was moved with compassion: "Run away, then, thou poor child," he
cried; "I cannot harm thee."
Snow-white thanked him so sweetly, and was out of sight in a few
moments.
"She will be devoured by wild beasts," he said to himself. But the
thought that he had not killed her was as if a stone-weight had been
lifted from his heart.
To satisfy the queen, he took part of the inside of a young fawn, which
the wicked woman thought was poor little Snow-white, and was overjoyed
to think she was dead.
But the poor little motherless child, when she found herself alone in
the wood, and saw nothing but trees and leaves, was dreadfully
frightened, and knew not what to do. At last she began to run over the
sharp stones and through the thorns, and though the wild beasts sprang
out before her, they did her no harm. She ran on as long as she could
till her little feet became quite sore; and towards evening she saw, to
her great joy, a pretty little house. So she went up to it, and found
the door open and no one at home.
It was a tiny little house, but everything in it was so clean and neat
and elegant that it is beyond description. In the middle of the room
stood a small table, covered with a snow-white table-cloth, ready for
supper. On it were arranged seven little plates, seven little spoons,
seven little knives and forks, and seven mugs. By the wall stood seven
little beds, near each other, covered with white quilts.
Poor Snow-white, who was hungry and thirsty, ate a few vegetables and a
little bread from each plate, and drank a little drop of wine from each
cup, for she did not like to take all she wanted from one alone. After
this, feeling very tired, she thought she would lie down and rest on one
of the beds, but she found it difficult to choose one to suit her. One
was too long, another too short; so she tried them all till she came to
the seventh, and that was so comfortable that she laid herself down, and
was soon fast asleep.
When it was quite dark the masters of the house came home. They were
seven little dwarfs, who dug and searched in the mountains for minerals.
First they lighted seven little lamps, and as soon as the room was full
of light they saw that some one had been there, for everything did not
stand in the order in which they had left it.
Then said the first, "Who has been sitting in my little chair?"
The second exclaimed, "Who has been eating from my little plate?"
The third cried, "Some one has taken part of my bread."
"Who has been eating my vegetables?" said the fourth.
Then said the fifth, "Some one has used my fork."
The sixth cried, "And who has been cutting with my knife?"
"And some one has been drinking out of my cup," said the seventh.
Then the eldest looked at his bed, and, seeing that it looked tumbled,
cried out that some one had been upon it. The others came running
forward, and found all their beds in the same condition. But when the
seventh approached his bed, and saw Snow-white lying there fast asleep,
he called the others, who came quickly, and holding their lights over
their heads, cried out in wonder as they beheld the sleeping child. "Oh,
what a beautiful little child!" they said to each other, and were so
delighted that they would not awaken her, but left her to sleep as long
as she liked in the little bed, while its owner slept with one of his
companions, and so the night passed away.
In the morning, when Snow-white awoke, and saw all the dwarfs, she was
terribly frightened. But they spoke kindly to her, till she lost all
fear, and they asked her name.
"I am called Snow-white," she replied.
"But how came you to our house?" asked one.
Then she related to them all that had happened; how her stepmother had
sent her into the wood with the hunter, who had spared her life, and
that, after wandering about for a whole day, she had found their house.
The dwarfs talked a little while together, and then one said, "Do you
think you could be our little housekeeper, to make the beds, cook the
dinner, and wash and sew and knit for us, and keep everything neat and
clean and orderly? If you can, then you shall stay here with us, and
nobody shall hurt you."
"Oh yes, I will try," said Snow-white. So they let her stay, and she was
a clever little thing. She managed very well, and kept the house quite
clean and in order. And while they were gone to the mountains to find
gold, she got their supper ready, and they were very happy together.
But every morning when they left her, the kind little dwarfs warned
Snow-white to be careful. While the maiden was alone they knew she was
in danger, and told her not to show herself, for her stepmother would
soon find out where she was, and said, "Whatever you do, let nobody into
the house while we are gone."
After the wicked queen had proved, as she thought, that Snow-white was
dead, she felt quite satisfied there was no one in the world now likely
to become so beautiful as herself, so she stepped up to her mirror and
asked:
     Who is most beautiful of all?"
To her vexation the mirror replied:
  "Fair queen, at home there is none like thee,
   But over the mountains is Snow-white free,
   With seven little dwarfs, who are strange to see;
   A thousand times fairer than thou is she."
The queen was furious when she heard this, for she knew the mirror was
truthful, and that the hunter must have deceived her, and that
Snow-white still lived. So she sat and pondered over these facts,
thinking what would be best to do, for as long as she was not the most
beautiful woman in the land, her jealousy gave her no peace. After a
time, she decided what to do. First, she painted her face, and whitened
her hair; then she dressed herself in old woman's clothes, and was so
disguised that no one could have recognised her.
Watching an opportunity, she left the castle, and took her way to the
wood near the mountains, where the seven little dwarfs lived. When she
reached the door, she knocked, and cried, "Beautiful goods to sell;
beautiful goods to sell."
Snow-white, when she heard it, peeped through the window, and said,
"Good-day, old lady. What have you in your basket for me to buy?"
"Everything that is pretty," she replied; "laces, and pearls, and
earrings, and bracelets of every colour;" and she held up her basket,
which was lined with glittering silk.
"I can let in this respectable old woman," thought Snow-white; "she will
not harm me." So she unbolted the door, and told her to come in. Oh, how
delighted Snow-white was with the pretty things; she bought several
trinkets, and a beautiful silk lace for her stays, but she did not see
the evil eye of the old woman who was watching her. Presently she said,
"Child, come here; I will show you how to lace your stays properly."
Snow-white had no suspicion, so she placed herself before the old woman
that she might lace her stays. But no sooner was the lace in the holes
than she began to lace so fast and pull so tight that Snow-white could
not breathe, and presently fell down at her feet as if dead.
"Now you are beautiful indeed," said the woman, and, fancying she heard
footsteps, she rushed away as quickly as she could.
Not long after, the seven dwarfs came home, and they were terribly
frightened to see dear little Snow-white lying on the ground without
motion, as if she were dead. They lifted her up, and saw in a moment
that her stays had been laced too tight Quickly they cut the stay-lace
in two, till Snow-white began to breathe a little, and after a time was
restored to life. But when the dwarfs heard what had happened, they
said: "That old market-woman was no other than your wicked stepmother.
Snow-white, you must never again let anyone in while we are not with
you."
The wicked queen when she returned home, after, as she thought, killing
Snow-white, went to her looking-glass and asked:
Then answered the mirror:
  "Queen, thou art not the fairest now;
   Snow-white over the mountain's brow
   A thousand times fairer is than thou."
When she heard this she was so terrified that the blood rushed to her
heart, for she knew that after all she had done Snow-white was still
alive. "I must think of something else," she said to herself, "to get
rid of that odious child."
Now this wicked queen had some knowledge of witchcraft, and she knew how
to poison a comb, so that whoever used it would fall dead. This the
wicked stepmother soon got ready, and dressing herself again like an old
woman, but quite different from the last, she started off to travel over
the mountains to the dwarfs' cottage.
When Snow-white heard the old cry, "Goods to sell, fine goods to sell,"
she looked out of the window and said:
"Go away, go away; I must not let you in."
"Look at this, then," said the woman; "you shall have it for your own if
you like," and she held up before the child's eyes the bright
tortoise-shell comb which she had poisoned.
Poor Snow-white could not refuse such a present, so she opened the door
and let the woman in, quite forgetting the advice of the dwarfs. After
she had bought a few things, the old woman said, "Let me try this comb
in your hair; it is so fine it will make it beautifully smooth and
glossy."
So Snow-white, thinking no wrong, stood before the woman to have her
hair dressed; but no sooner had the comb touched the roots of her hair
than the poison took effect, and the maiden fell to the ground lifeless.
"You paragon of beauty," said the wicked woman, "all has just happened
as I expected," and then she went away quickly.
Fortunately evening soon arrived, and the seven dwarfs returned home.
When they saw Snow-white lying dead on the ground, they knew at once
that the stepmother had been there again; but on seeing the poisoned
comb in her hair they pulled it out quickly, and Snow-white very soon
came to herself, and related all that had passed.
Again they warned her not to let anyone enter the house during their
absence, and on no account to open the door; but Snow-white was not
clever enough to resist her clever wicked stepmother, and she forgot to
obey.
The wicked queen felt sure now that she had really killed Snow-white; so
as soon as she returned home she went to her looking-glass, and
inquired:
But the mirror replied:
  "Queen, thou art the fairest here,
   But not when Snow-white is near;
   Over the mountains still is she,
   Fairer a thousand times than thee."
As the looking-glass thus replied, the queen trembled and quaked with
rage. "Snow-white shall die," cried she, "if it costs me my own life!"
Then she went into a lonely forbidden chamber where no one was allowed
to come, and poisoned a beautiful apple. Outwardly it looked ripe and
tempting, of a pale green with rosy cheeks, so that it made everyone's
mouth water to look at it, but whoever ate even a small piece must die.
As soon as this apple was ready, the wicked queen painted her face,
disguised her hair, dressed herself as a farmer's wife, and went again
over the mountains to the dwarfs' cottage.
When she knocked at the door, Snow-white stretched her head out of the
window, and said, "I dare not let you in; the seven dwarfs have
forbidden me."
"But I am all right," said the farmer's wife. "Stay, I will show you my
apples. Are they not beautiful? let me make you a present of one."
"No, thank you," cried Snow-white; "I dare not take it."
"What!" cried the woman, "are you afraid it is poisoned? Look here now,
I will cut the apple in halves; you shall have the rosy-cheek side, and
I will eat the other."
The apple was so cleverly made that the red side alone was poisonous.
Snow-white longed so much for the beautiful fruit as she saw the
farmer's wife eat one half that she could not any longer resist, but
stretched out her hand from the window and took the poisoned half. But
no sooner had she taken one mouthful than she fell on the ground dead.
Then the wicked queen glanced in at the window with a horrible look in
her eye, and laughed aloud as she exclaimed:
"White as snow, red as blood, and black as ebony; this time the dwarfs
will not be able to awake thee."
And as soon as she arrived at home, and asked her mirror who was the
most beautiful in the land, it replied:
  "Fair queen, there is none in all the land
   So beautiful as thou."
Then had her envious heart rest, at least such rest as a heart full of
envy and malice ever can have.
The little dwarfs, when they came home in the evening, found poor
Snow-white on the ground; but though they lifted her up, there were no
signs of breath from her mouth, and they found she was really dead. Yet
they tried in every way to restore her; they tried to extract the poison
from her lips, they combed her hair, and washed it with wine and water,
but all to no purpose: the dear child gave no signs of life, and at last
they knew she was dead. Then they laid her on a bier, and the seven
dwarfs seated themselves round her, and wept and mourned for three days.
They would have buried her then, but there was no change in her
appearance; her face was as fresh, and her cheeks and lips had their
usual colour. Then said one, "We cannot lay this beautiful child in the
dark, cold earth."
So they agreed to have a coffin made entirely of glass, transparent all
over, that they might watch for any signs of decay, and they wrote in
letters of gold her name on the lid, and that she was the daughter of a
king. The coffin was placed on the side of the mountain, and each of
them watched it by turns, so that it was never left alone. And the birds
of the air came near and mourned for Snow-white; first the owl, then the
raven, and at last the dove. Snow-white lay for a long, long time in the
glass coffin, but showed not the least signs of decay. It seemed as if
she slept; for her skin was snow white, her cheeks rosy red, and her
hair black as ebony.
It happened one day that the son of a king, while riding in the forest,
came by chance upon the dwarfs' house and asked for a night's lodging.
As he left the next morning he saw the coffin on the mountain-side, with
beautiful Snow-white lying in it, and read what was written upon the lid
in letters of gold.
Then he said to the dwarfs, "Let me have this coffin, and I will give
you for it whatever you ask."
But the elder dwarf answered, "We would not give it thee for all the
gold in the world."
But the prince answered, "Let me have it as a gift, then. I know not
why, but my heart is drawn towards this beautiful child, and I feel I
cannot live without her. If you will let me have her, she shall be
treated with the greatest honour and respect as one dearly beloved."
As he thus spoke the good little dwarfs were full of sympathy for him,
and gave him the coffin. Then the prince called his servants, and the
coffin was placed on their shoulders, and they carried it away, followed
by the king's son, who watched it carefully. Now it happened that one of
them made a false step and stumbled. This shook the coffin, and caused
the poisoned piece of apple which Snow-white had bitten to roll out of
her mouth. A little while after she suddenly opened her eyes, lifted up
the coffin-lid, raised herself and was again alive.
"Oh! where am I?" she cried.
Full of joy, the king's son approached her, and said, "Dear Snow-white,
you are safe; you are with me."
Then he related to her all that had happened, and what the little dwarfs
had told him about her, and said at last, "I love you better than all in
the world besides, dear little Snow-white, and you must come with me to
my father's castle and be my wife."
Then was Snow-white taken out of the coffin and placed in a carriage to
travel with the prince, and the king was so pleased with his son's
choice that the marriage was soon after celebrated with great pomp and
magnificence.
Now it happened that the stepmother of Snow-white was invited, among
other guests, to the wedding-feast. Before she left her house she stood
in all her rich dress before the magic mirror to admire her own
appearance, but she could not help saying;
Then to her surprise the mirror replied:
  "Fair queen, thou art the fairest here,
     But at the palace, now,
   The bride will prove a thousand times
     More beautiful than thou."
Then the wicked woman uttered a curse, and was so dreadfully alarmed
that she knew not what to do. At first she declared she would not go to
this wedding at all, but she felt it impossible to rest until she had
seen the bride, so she determined to go. But what was her astonishment
and vexation when she recognised in the young bride Snow-white herself,
now grown a charming young woman, and richly dressed in royal robes! Her
rage and terror were so great that she stood still and could not move
for some minutes. At last she went into the ballroom, but the slippers
she wore were to her as iron bands full of coals of fire, in which she
was obliged to dance. And so in the red, glowing shoes she continued to
dance till she fell dead on the floor, a sad example of envy and
jealousy.
THE ENCHANTED STAG
There were once a brother and sister who loved each other dearly; their
mother was dead, and their father had married again a woman who was most
unkind and cruel to them. One day the boy took his sister's hand, and
said to her, "Dear little sister, since our mother died we have not had
one happy hour. Our stepmother gives us dry hard crusts for dinner and
supper; she often knocks us about, and threatens to kick us out of the
house. Even the little dogs under the table fare better than we do, for
she often throws them nice pieces to eat. Heaven pity us! Oh, if our
dear mother knew! Come, let us go out into the wide world!"
So they went out, and wandered over fields and meadows the whole day
till evening. At last they found themselves in a large forest; it began
to rain, and the little sister said, "See, brother, heaven and our
hearts weep together." At last, tired out with hunger and sorrow, and
the long journey, they crept into a hollow tree, laid themselves down,
and slept till morning.
When they awoke the sun was high in the heavens, and shone brightly into
the hollow tree, so they left their place of shelter and wandered away
in search of water.
"Oh, I am so thirsty!" said the boy. "If we could only find a brook or a
stream." He stopped to listen, and said, "Stay, I think I hear a running
stream." So he took his sister by the hand, and they ran together to
find it.
Now, the stepmother of these poor children was a wicked witch. She had
seen the children go away, and, following them cautiously like a snake,
had bewitched all the springs and streams in the forest. The pleasant
trickling of a brook over the pebbles was heard by the children as they
reached it, and the boy was just stooping to drink, when the sister
heard in the babbling of the brook:
    "Whoever drinks of me, a tiger soon will be."
Then she cried quickly, "Stay, brother, stay! do not drink, or you will
become a wild beast, and tear me to pieces."
Thirsty as he was, the brother conquered his desire to drink at her
words, and said, "Dear sister, I will wait till we come to a spring." So
they wandered farther, but as they approached, she heard in the bubbling
spring the words--
    "Who drinks of me, a wolf will be."
"Brother, I pray you, do not drink of this brook; you will be changed
into a wolf, and devour me."
Again the brother denied himself and promised to wait; but he said, "At
the next stream I must drink, say what you will, my thirst is so great."
Not far off ran a pretty streamlet, looking clear and bright; but here
also in its murmuring waters, the sister heard the words--
    "Who dares to drink of me,
     Turned to a stag will be."
"Dear brother, do not drink," she began; but she was too late, for her
brother had already knelt by the stream to drink, and as the first drop
of water touched his lips he became a fawn. How the little sister wept
over the enchanted brother, and the fawn wept also.
He did not run away, but stayed close to her; and at last she said,
"Stand still, dear fawn; don't fear, I must take care of you, but I will
never leave you." So she untied her little golden garter and fastened it
round the neck of the fawn; then she gathered some soft green rushes,
and braided them into a soft string, which she fastened to the fawn's
golden collar, and then led him away into the depths of the forest.
After wandering about for some time, they at last found a little
deserted hut, and the sister was overjoyed, for she thought it would
form a nice shelter for them both. So she led the fawn in, and then went
out alone, to gather moss and dried leaves, to make him a soft bed.
Every morning she went out to gather dried roots, nuts, and berries, for
her own food, and sweet fresh grass for the fawn, which he ate out of
her hand, and the poor little animal went out with her, and played about
as happy as the day was long.
When evening came, and the poor sister felt tired, she would kneel down
and say her prayers, and then lay her delicate head on the fawn's back,
which was a soft warm pillow, on which she could sleep peacefully. Had
this dear brother only kept his own proper form, how happy they would
have been together! After they had been alone in the forest for some
time, and the little sister had grown a lovely maiden, and the fawn a
large stag, a numerous hunting party came to the forest, and amongst
them the king of the country.
The sounding horn, the barking of the dogs, the holloa of the huntsmen,
resounded through the forest, and were heard by the stag, who became
eager to join his companions.
"Oh dear," he said, "do let me go and see the hunt; I cannot restrain
myself." And he begged so hard that at last she reluctantly consented.
"But remember," she said, "I must lock the cottage door against those
huntsmen, so when you come back in the evening, and knock, I shall not
admit you, unless you say, 'Dear little sister let me in.'"
He bounded off as she spoke, scarcely stopping to listen, for it was so
delightful for him to breathe the fresh air and be free again.
He had not run far when the king's chief hunter caught sight of the
beautiful animal, and started off in chase of him; but it was no easy
matter to overtake such rapid footsteps. Once, when he thought he had
him safe, the fawn sprang over the bushes and disappeared.
As it was now nearly dark, he ran up to the little cottage, knocked at
the door, and cried, "Dear little sister, let me in." The door was
instantly opened, and oh, how glad his sister was to see him safely
resting on his soft pleasant bed!
A few days after this, the huntsmen were again in the forest; and when
the fawn heard the holloa, he could not rest in peace, but begged his
sister again to let him go.
She opened the door, and said, "I will let you go this time; but pray do
not forget to say what I told you, when you return this evening."
The chief hunter very soon espied the beautiful fawn with the golden
collar, pointed it out to the king, and they determined to hunt it.
They chased him with all their skill till the evening; but he was too
light and nimble for them to catch, till a shot wounded him slightly in
the foot, so that he was obliged to hide himself in the bushes, and,
after the huntsmen were gone, limp slowly home.
One of them, however, determined to follow him at a distance, and
discover where he went. What was his surprise at seeing him go up to a
door and knock, and to hear him say, "Dear little sister, let me in."
The door was only opened a little way, and quickly shut; but the
huntsman had seen enough to make him full of wonder, when he returned
and described to the king what he had seen.
"We will have one more chase to-morrow," said the king, "and discover
this mystery."
In the meantime the loving sister was terribly alarmed at finding the
stag's foot wounded and bleeding. She quickly washed off the blood, and,
after bathing the wound, placed healing herbs on it, and said, "Lie down
on your bed, dear fawn, and the wound will soon heal, if you rest your
foot."
In the morning the wound was so much better that the fawn felt the foot
almost as strong as ever, and so, when he again heard the holloa of the
hunters, he could not rest. "Oh, dear sister, I must go once more; it
will be easy for me to avoid the hunters now, and my foot feels quite
well; they will not hunt me unless they see me running, and I don't mean
to do that."
But his sister wept, and begged him not to go: "If they kill you, dear
fawn, I shall be here alone in the forest, forsaken by the whole world."
"And I shall die of grief," he said, "if I remain here listening to the
hunter's horn."
So at length his sister, with a heavy heart, set him free, and he
bounded away joyfully into the forest.
As soon as the king caught sight of him, he said to the huntsmen,
"Follow that stag about, but don't hurt him." So they hunted him all
day, but at the approach of sunset the king said to the hunter who had
followed the fawn the day before, "Come and show me the little cottage."
So they went together, and when the king saw it he sent his companion
home, and went on alone so quickly that he arrived there before the
fawn; and, going up to the little door, knocked and said softly, "Dear
little sister, let me in."
As the door opened, the king stepped in, and in great astonishment saw a
maiden more beautiful than he had ever seen in his life standing before
him. But how frightened she felt to see instead of her dear little fawn
a noble gentleman walk in with a gold crown on his head.
However, he appeared very friendly, and after a little talk he held out
his hand to her, and said, "Wilt thou go with me to my castle and be my
dear wife?"
"Ah yes," replied the maiden, "I would willingly; but I cannot leave my
dear fawn: he must go with me wherever I am."
"He shall remain with you as long as you live," replied the king, "and I
will never ask you to forsake him."
While they were talking, the fawn came bounding in, looking quite well
and happy. Then his sister fastened the string of rushes to his collar,
took it in her hand, and led him away from the cottage in the wood to
where the king's beautiful horse waited for him.
The king placed the maiden before him on his horse and rode away to his
castle, the fawn following by their side. Soon after, their marriage was
celebrated with great splendour, and the fawn was taken the greatest
care of, and played where he pleased, or roamed about the castle grounds
in happiness and safety.
In the meantime the wicked stepmother, who had caused these two young
people such misery, supposed that the sister had been devoured by wild
beasts, and that the fawn had been hunted to death. Therefore when she
heard of their happiness, such envy and malice arose in her heart that
she could find no rest till she had tried to destroy it.
She and her ugly daughter came to the castle when the queen had a little
baby, and one of them pretended to be a nurse, and at last got the
mother and child into their power.
They shut the queen up in the bath, and tried to suffocate her, and the
old woman put her own ugly daughter in the queen's bed that the king
might not know she was away.
She would not, however, let him speak to her, but pretended that she
must be kept quite quiet.
The queen escaped from the bath-room, where the wicked old woman had
locked her up, but she did not go far, as she wanted to watch over her
child and the little fawn.
For two nights the baby's nurse saw a figure of the queen come into the
room and take up her baby and nurse it. Then she told the king, and he
determined to watch himself. The old stepmother, who acted as nurse to
her ugly daughter, whom she tried to make the king believe was his wife,
had said that the queen was too weak to see him, and never left her
room. "There cannot be two queens," said the king to himself, "so
to-night I will watch in the nursery." As soon as the figure came in and
took up her baby, he saw it was his real wife, and caught her in his
arms, saying, "You are my own beloved wife, as beautiful as ever."
The wicked witch had thrown her into a trance, hoping she would die, and
that the king would then marry her daughter; but on the king speaking to
her, the spell was broken. The queen told the king how cruelly she had
been treated by her stepmother, and on hearing this he became very
angry, and had the witch and her daughter brought to justice. They were
both sentenced to die--the daughter to be devoured by wild beasts, and
the mother to be burnt alive.
No sooner, however, was she reduced to ashes than the charm which held
the queen's brother in the form of a stag was broken; he recovered his
own natural shape, and appeared before them a tall, handsome young man.
After this, the brother and sister lived happily and peacefully for the
rest of their lives.
HANSEL AND GRETHEL
Near the borders of a large forest dwelt in olden times a poor
wood-cutter, who had two children--a boy named Hansel, and his sister,
Grethel. They had very little to live upon, and once when there was a
dreadful season of scarcity in the land, the poor wood-cutter could not
earn sufficient to supply their daily food.
One evening, after the children were gone to bed, the parents sat
talking together over their sorrow, and the poor husband sighed, and
said to his wife, who was not the mother of his children, but their
stepmother, "What will become of us, for I cannot earn enough to support
myself and you, much less the children? what shall we do with them, for
they must not starve?"
"I know what to do, husband," she replied; "early to-morrow morning we
will take the children for a walk across the forest and leave them in
the thickest part; they will never find the way home again, you may
depend, and then we shall only have to work for ourselves."
"No, wife," said the man, "that I will never do. How could I have the
heart to leave my children all alone in the wood, where the wild beasts
would come quickly and devour them?"
"Oh, you fool," replied the stepmother, "if you refuse to do this, you
know we must all four perish with hunger; you may as well go and cut the
wood for our coffins." And after this she let him have no peace till he
became quite worn out, and could not sleep for hours, but lay thinking
in sorrow about his children.
The two children, who also were too hungry to sleep, heard all that
their stepmother had said to their father. Poor little Grethel wept
bitter tears as she listened, and said to her brother, "What is going to
happen to us, Hansel?"
"Hush, Grethel," he whispered, "don't be so unhappy; I know what to do."
Then they lay quite still till their parents were asleep.
As soon as it was quiet, Hansel got up, put on his little coat,
unfastened the door, and slipped out The moon shone brightly, and the
white pebble stones which lay before the cottage door glistened like new
silver money. Hansel stooped and picked up as many of the pebbles as he
could stuff in his little coat pockets. He then went back to Grethel and
said, "Be comforted, dear little sister, and sleep in peace; heaven will
take care of us." Then he laid himself down again in bed, and slept till
the day broke.
As soon as the sun was risen, the stepmother came and woke the two
children, and said, "Get up, you lazy bones, and come into the wood with
me to gather wood for the fire." Then she gave each of them a piece of
bread, and said, "You must keep that to eat for your dinner, and don't
quarrel over it, for you will get nothing more."
Grethel took the bread under her charge, for Hansel's pockets were full
of pebbles. Then the stepmother led them a long way into the forest.
They had gone but a very short distance when Hansel looked back at the
house, and this he did again and again.
At last his stepmother said, "Why do you keep staying behind and looking
back so?"
"Oh, mother," said the boy, "I can see my little white cat sitting on
the roof of the house, and I am sure she is crying for me."
"Nonsense," she replied; "that is not your cat; it is the morning sun
shining on the chimney-pot."
Hansel had seen no cat, but he stayed behind every time to drop a white
pebble from his pocket on the ground as they walked.
As soon as they reached a thick part of the wood, their stepmother said:
"Come, children, gather some wood, and I will make a fire, for it is
very cold here."
Then Hansel and Grethel raised quite a high heap of brushwood and
faggots, which soon blazed up into a bright fire, and the woman said to
them:
"Sit down here, children, and rest, while I go and find your father, who
is cutting wood in the forest; when we have finished our work, we will
come again and fetch you."
Hansel and Grethel seated themselves by the fire, and when noon arrived
they each ate the piece of bread which their stepmother had given them
for their dinner; and as long as they heard the strokes of the axe they
felt safe, for they believed that their father was working near them.
But it was not an axe they heard--only a branch which still hung on a
withered tree, and was moved up and down by the wind. At last, when they
had been sitting there a long time, the children's eyes became heavy
with fatigue, and they fell fast asleep. When they awoke it was dark
night, and poor Grethel began to cry, and said, "Oh, how shall we get
out of the wood?"
But Hansel comforted her. "Don't fear," he said; "let us wait a little
while till the moon rises, and then we shall easily find our way home."
Very soon the full moon rose, and then Hansel took his little sister by
the hand, and the white pebble stones, which glittered like newly-coined
money in the moonlight, and which Hansel had dropped as he walked,
pointed out the way. They walked all the night through, and did not
reach their father's house till break of day.
They knocked at the door, and when their stepmother opened it, she
exclaimed: "You naughty children, why have you been staying so long in
the forest? we thought you were never coming back," But their father was
overjoyed to see them, for it grieved him to the heart to think that
they had been left alone in the wood.
Not long after this there came another time of scarcity and want in
every house, and the children heard their stepmother talking after they
were in bed. "The times are as bad as ever," she said; "we have just
half a loaf left, and when that is gone all love will be at an end. The
children must go away; we will take them deeper into the forest this
time, and they will not be able to find their way home as they did
before; it is the only plan to save ourselves from starvation." But the
husband felt heavy at heart, for he thought it was better to share the
last morsel with his children.
His wife would listen to nothing he said, but continued to reproach him,
and as he had given way to her the first time, he could not refuse to do
so now. The children were awake, and heard all the conversation; so, as
soon as their parents slept, Hansel got up, intending to go out and
gather some more of the bright pebbles to let fall as he walked, that
they might point out the way home; but his stepmother had locked the
door, and he could not open it. When he went back to his bed he told his
little sister not to fret, but to go to sleep in peace, for he was sure
they would be taken care of.
Early the next morning the stepmother came and pulled the children out
of bed, and, when they were dressed, gave them each a piece of bread for
their dinners, smaller than they had had before, and then they started
on their way to the wood.
As they walked, Hansel, who had the bread in his pocket, broke off
little crumbs, and stopped every now and then to drop one, turning round
as if he was looking back at his home.
"Hansel," said the woman, "what are you stopping for in that way? Come
along directly."
"I saw my pigeon sitting on the roof, and he wants to say good-bye to
me," replied the boy.
"Nonsense," she said; "that is not your pigeon; it is only the morning
sun shining on the chimney-top."
But Hansel did not look back any more; he only dropped pieces of bread
behind him, as they walked through the wood. This time they went on till
they reached the thickest and densest part of the forest, where they had
never been before in all their lives. Again they gathered faggots and
brushwood, of which the stepmother made up a large fire. Then she said,
"Remain here, children, and rest, while I go to help your father, who is
cutting wood in the forest; when you feel tired, you can lie down and
sleep for a little while, and we will come and fetch you in the evening,
when your father has finished his work."
So the children remained alone till mid-day, and then Grethel shared her
piece of bread with Hansel, for he had scattered his own all along the
road as they walked. After this they slept for awhile, and the evening
drew on; but no one came to fetch the poor children. When they awoke it
was quite dark, and poor little Grethel was afraid; but Hansel comforted
her, as he had done before, by telling her they need only wait till the
moon rose. "You know, little sister," he said, "that I have thrown
breadcrumbs all along the road we came, and they will easily point out
the way home."
But when they went out of the thicket into the moonlight they found no
breadcrumbs, for the numerous birds which inhabited the trees of the
forest had picked them all up.
Hansel tried to hide his fear when he made this sad discovery, and said
to his sister, "Cheer up, Grethel; I dare say we shall find our way home
without the crumbs. Let us try." But this they found impossible. They
wandered about the whole night, and the next day from morning till
evening; but they could not get out of the wood, and were so hungry that
had it not been for a few berries which they picked they must have
starved.
At last they were so tired that their poor little legs could carry them
no farther; so they laid themselves down under a tree and went to sleep.
When they awoke it was the third morning since they had left their
father's house, and they determined to try once more to find their way
home; but it was no use, they only went still deeper into the wood, and
knew that if no help came they must starve.
About noon, they saw a beautiful snow-white bird sitting on the branch
of a tree, and singing so beautifully that they stood still to listen.
When he had finished his song, he spread out his wings and flew on
before them. The children followed him, till at last they saw at a
distance a small house; and the bird flew and perched on the roof.
But how surprised were the boy and girl, when they came nearer, to find
that the house was built of gingerbread, and ornamented with sweet cakes
and tarts, while the window was formed of barley-sugar. "Oh!" exclaimed
Hansel, "let us stop here and have a splendid feast. I will have a piece
from the roof first, Grethel; and you can eat some of the barley-sugar
window, it tastes so nice." Hansel reached up on tiptoe, and breaking
off a piece of the gingerbread, he began to eat with all his might, for
he was very hungry. Grethel seated herself on the doorstep, and began
munching away at the cakes of which it was made. Presently a voice came
out of the cottage:
  "Munching, crunching, munching,
   Who's eating up my house?"
Then answered the children:
    "The wind, the wind,
     Only the wind,"
and went on eating as if they never meant to leave off, without a
suspicion of wrong. Hansel, who found the cake on the roof taste very
good, broke off another large piece, and Grethel had just taken out a
whole pane of barley-sugar from the window, and seated herself to eat
it, when the door opened, and a strange-looking old woman came out
leaning on a stick.
Hansel and Grethel were so frightened that they let fall what they held
in their hands. The old woman shook her head at them, and said, "Ah, you
dear children, who has brought you here? Come in, and stay with me for a
little while, and there shall no harm happen to you." She seized them
both by the hands as she spoke, and led them into the house. She gave
them for supper plenty to eat and drink--milk and pancakes and sugar,
apples and nuts; and when evening came, Hansel and Grethel were shown
two beautiful little beds with white curtains, and they lay down in them
and thought they were in heaven.
But although the old woman pretended to be friendly, she was a wicked
witch, who had her house built of gingerbread on purpose to entrap
children. When once they were in her power, she would feed them well
till they got fat, and then kill them and cook them for her dinner; and
this she called her feast-day. Fortunately the witch had weak eyes, and
could not see very well; but she had a very keen scent, as wild animals
have, and could easily discover when human beings were near. As Hansel
and Grethel had approached her cottage, she laughed to herself
maliciously, and said, with a sneer: "I have them now; they shall not
escape from me again!"
Early in the morning, before the children were awake, she was up,
standing by their beds; and when she saw how beautiful they looked in
their sleep, with their round rosy cheeks, she muttered to herself,
"What nice tit-bits they will be!" Then she laid hold of Hansel with her
rough hand, dragged him out of bed, and led him to a little cage which
had a lattice-door, and shut him in; he might scream as much as he
would, but it was all useless.
After this she went back to Grethel, and, shaking her roughly till she
woke, cried: "Get up, you lazy hussy, and draw some water, that I may
boil something good for your brother, who is shut up in a cage outside
till he gets fat; and then I shall cook him and eat him!" When Grethel
heard this she began to cry bitterly; but it was all useless, she was
obliged to do as the wicked witch told her.
For poor Hansel's breakfast the best of everything was cooked; but
Grethel had nothing for herself but a crab's claw. Every morning the old
woman would go out to the little cage, and say: "Hansel, stick out your
finger, that I may feel if you are fat enough for eating." But Hansel,
who knew how dim her old eyes were, always stuck a bone through the bars
of his cage, which she thought was his finger, for she could not see;
and when she felt how thin it was, she wondered very much why he did not
get fat.
However, as the weeks went on, and Hansel seemed not to get any fatter,
she became impatient, and said she could not wait any longer. "Go,
Grethel," she cried to the maiden, "be quick and draw water; Hansel may
be fat or lean, I don't care, to-morrow morning I mean to kill him, and
cook him!"
Oh! how the poor little sister grieved when she was forced to draw the
water; and, as the tears rolled down her cheeks, she exclaimed: "It
would have been better to be eaten by wild beasts, or to have been
starved to death in the woods; then we should have died together!"
"Stop your crying!" cried the old woman; "it is not of the least use, no
one will come to help you."
Early in the morning Grethel was obliged to go out and fill the great
pot with water, and hang it over the fire to boil. As soon as this was
done, the old woman said, "We will bake some bread first; I have made
the oven hot, and the dough is already kneaded." Then she dragged poor
little Grethel up to the oven door, under which the flames were burning
fiercely, and said: "Creep in there, and see if it is hot enough yet to
bake the bread." But if Grethel had obeyed her, she would have shut the
poor child in and baked her for dinner, instead of boiling Hansel.
Grethel, however, guessed what she wanted to do, and said, "I don't know
how to get in through that narrow door."
"Stupid goose," said the old woman, "why, the oven door is quite large
enough for me; just look, I could get in myself." As she spoke she
stepped forward and pretended to put her head in the oven.
A sudden thought gave Grethel unusual strength; she started forward,
gave the old woman a push which sent her right into the oven, then she
shut the iron door and fastened the bolt.
Oh! how the old witch did howl, it was quite horrible to hear her. But
Grethel ran away, and therefore she was left to burn, just as she had
left many poor little children to burn. And how quickly Grethel ran to
Hansel, opened the door of his cage, and cried, "Hansel, Hansel, we are
free; the old witch is dead." He flew like a bird out of his cage at
these words as soon as the door was opened, and the children were so
overjoyed that they ran into each other's arms, and kissed each other
with the greatest love.
And now that there was nothing to be afraid of, they went back into the
house, and while looking round the old witch's room, they saw an old oak
chest, which they opened, and found it full of pearls and precious
stones. "These are better than pebbles," said Hansel; and he filled his
pockets as full as they would hold.
"I will carry some home too," said Grethel, and she held out her apron,
which held quite as much as Hansel's pockets.
"We will go now," he said, "and get away as soon as we can from this
enchanted forest."
They had been walking for nearly two hours when they came to a large
sheet of water.
"What shall we do now?" said the boy. "We cannot get across, and there
is no bridge of any sort."
"Oh! here comes a boat," cried Grethel, but she was mistaken; it was
only a white duck which came swimming towards the children. "Perhaps she
will help us across if we ask her," said the child; and she sung,
"Little duck, do help poor Hansel and Grethel; there is not a bridge,
nor a boat--will you let us sail across on your white back?"
The good-natured duck came near the bank as Grethel spoke, so close
indeed that Hansel could seat himself and wanted to take his little
sister on his lap, but she said, "No, we shall be too heavy for the kind
duck; let her take us over one at a time."
The good creature did as the children wished; she carried Grethel over
first, and then came back for Hansel. And then how happy the children
were to find themselves in a part of the wood which they remembered
quite well, and as they walked on, the more familiar it became, till at
last they caught sight of their father's house. Then they began to run,
and, bursting into the room, threw themselves into their father's arms.
Poor man, he had not had a moment's peace since the children had been
left alone in the forest; he was full of joy at finding them safe and
well again, and now they had nothing to fear, for their wicked
stepmother was dead.
But how surprised the poor wood-cutter was when Grethel opened and shook
her little apron to see the glittering pearls and precious stones
scattered about the room, while Hansel drew handful after handful from
his pockets. From this moment all his care and sorrow was at an end, and
the father lived in happiness with his children till his death.
THE STORY OF ALADDIN; OR, THE WONDERFUL LAMP
In one of the large and rich cities of China, there once lived a tailor
named Mustapha. He was very poor. He could hardly, by his daily labour,
maintain himself and his family, which consisted only of his wife and a
son.
His son, who was called Aladdin, was a very careless and idle fellow. He
was disobedient to his father and mother, and would go out early in the
morning and stay out all day, playing in the streets and public places
with idle children of his own age.
When he was old enough to learn a trade, his father took him into his
own shop, and taught him how to use his needle; but all his father's
endeavours to keep him to his work were vain, for no sooner was his back
turned, than he was gone for that day, Mustapha chastised him, but
Aladdin was incorrigible, and his father, to his great grief, was forced
to abandon him to his idleness; and was so much troubled about him, that
he fell sick and died in a few months.
Aladdin, who was now no longer restrained by the fear of a father, gave
himself entirely over to his idle habits, and was never out of the
streets from his companions. This course he followed till he was fifteen
years old, without giving his mind to any useful pursuit, or the least
reflection on what would become of him. As he was one day playing,
according to custom, in the street, with his evil associates, a stranger
passing by stood to observe him.
This stranger was a sorcerer, known as the African magician, as he had
been but two days arrived from Africa, his native country.
The African magician, observing in Aladdin's countenance something which
assured him that he was a fit boy for his purpose, inquired his name and
history of some of his companions, and when he had learnt all he desired
to know, went up to him, and taking him aside from his comrades, said,
"Child, was not your father called Mustapha the tailor?" "Yes, sir,"
answered the boy, "but he has been dead a long time."
At these words the African magician threw his arms about Aladdin's neck,
and kissed him several times, with tears in his eyes, and said, "I am
your uncle. Your worthy father was my own brother. I knew you at first
sight, you are so like him." Then he gave Aladdin a handful of small
money, saying, "Go, my son, to your mother, give my love to her, and
tell her that I will visit her to-morrow, that I may see where my good
brother lived so long, and ended his days."
Aladdin ran to his mother, overjoyed at the money his uncle had given
him. "Mother," said he, "have I an uncle?" "No, child," replied his
mother, "you have no uncle by your father's side or mine." "I am just
now come," said Aladdin, "from a man who says he is my uncle and my
father's brother. He cried and kissed me when I told him my father was
dead, and gave me money, sending his love to you, and promising to come
and pay you a visit, that he may see the house my father lived and died
in." "Indeed, child," replied the mother, "your father had no brother,
nor have you an uncle."
The next day the magician found Aladdin playing in another part of the
town, and embracing him as before, put two pieces of gold into his hand,
and said to him, "Carry this, child, to your mother; tell her that I
will come and see her to-night, and bid her get us something for supper;
but first show ms the house where you live."
Aladdin showed the African magician the house, and carried the two
pieces of gold to his mother, who went out and bought provisions; and
considering she wanted various utensils, borrowed them of her
neighbours. She spent the whole day in preparing the supper; and at
night, when it was ready, said to her son, "Perhaps the stranger knows
not how to find our house; go and bring him, if you meet with him."
Aladdin was just ready to go, when the magician knocked at the door, and
came in loaded with wine and all sorts of fruits, which he brought for a
dessert. After he had given what he brought into Aladdin's hands, he
saluted his mother, and desired her to show him the place where his
brother Mustapha used to sit on the sofa; and when she had so done, he
fell down and kissed it several times, crying out, with tears in his
eyes, "My poor brother! how unhappy am I, not to have come soon enough
to give you one last embrace." Aladdin's mother desired him to sit down
in the same place, but he declined. "No," said he, "I shall not do that;
but give me leave to sit opposite to it, that although I see not the
master of a family so dear to me, I may at least behold the place where
he used to sit."
When the magician had made choice of a place, and sat down, he began to
enter into discourse with Aladdin's mother. "My good sister," said he,
"do not be surprised at your never having seen me all the time you have
been married to my brother Mustapha of happy memory. I have been forty
years absent from this country, which is my native place, as well as my
late brother's; and during that time have travelled into the Indies,
Persia, Arabia, Syria, and Egypt, and afterward crossed over into
Africa, where I took up my abode. At last, as it is natural for a man, I
was desirous to see my native country again, and to embrace my dear
brother; and finding I had strength enough to undertake so long a
journey, I made the necessary preparations, and set out. Nothing ever
afflicted me so much as hearing of my brother's death. But God be
praised for all things! It is a comfort for me to find, as it were, my
brother in a son, who has his most remarkable features."
The African magician perceiving that the widow wept at the remembrance
of her husband, changed the conversation, and turning toward her son,
asked him, "What business do you follow? Are you of any trade?"
At this question the youth hung down his head, and was not a little
abashed when his mother answered "Aladdin is an idle fellow. His father,
when alive, strove all he could to teach him his trade, but could not
succeed; and since his death, notwithstanding all I can say to him, he
does nothing but idle away his time in the streets, as you saw him,
without considering he is no longer a child; and if you do not make him
ashamed of it, I despair of his ever coming to any good. For my part, I
am resolved, one of these days, to turn him out of doors, and let him
provide for himself."
After these words, Aladdin's mother burst into tears; and the magician
said, "This is not well, nephew; you must think of helping yourself, and
getting your livelihood. There are many sorts of trades; perhaps you do
not like your father's, and would prefer another; I will endeavour to
help you. If you have no mind to learn any handicraft, I will take a
shop for you, furnish it with all sorts of fine stuffs and linens; and
then with the money you make of them you can lay in fresh goods, and
live in an honourable way. Tell me freely what you think of my proposal;
you shall always find me ready to keep my word."
This plan just suited Aladdin, who hated work. He told the magician he
had a greater inclination to that business than to any other, and that
he should be much obliged to him for his kindness. "Well then," said the
African magician, "I will carry you with me to-morrow, clothe you as
handsomely as the best merchants in the city, and afterward we will open
a shop as I mentioned."
The widow, after his promises of kindness to her son, no longer doubted
that the magician was her husband's brother. She thanked him for his
good intentions; and after having exhorted Aladdin to render himself
worthy of his uncle's favour, served up supper, at which they talked of
several indifferent matters; and then the magician took his leave and
retired.
He came again the next day, as he had promised, and took Aladdin with
him to a merchant, who sold all sorts of clothes for different ages and
ranks, ready made, and a variety of fine stuffs, and bade Aladdin choose
those he preferred, which he paid for.
When Aladdin found himself so handsomely equipped, he returned his uncle
thanks, who thus addressed him: "As you are soon to be a merchant, it is
proper you should frequent these shops, and be acquainted with them." He
then showed him the largest and finest mosques, carried him to the khans
or inns where the merchants and travellers lodged, and afterward to the
sultan's palace, where he had free access; and at last brought him to
his own khan, where, meeting with some merchants he had become
acquainted with since his arrival, he gave them a treat, to bring them
and his pretended nephew acquainted.
This entertainment lasted till night, when Aladdin would have taken
leave of his uncle to go home; the magician would not let him go by
himself, but conducted him to his mother, who, as soon as she saw him so
well dressed, was transported with joy, and bestowed a thousand
blessings upon the magician.
Early the next morning the magician called again for Aladdin, and said
he would take him to spend that day in the country, and on the next he
would purchase the shop. He then led him out at one of the gates of the
city, to some magnificent palaces, to each of which belonged beautiful
gardens, into which anybody might enter. At every building he came to,
he asked Aladdin if he did not think it fine; and the youth was ready to
answer when any one presented itself, crying out, "Here is a finer
house, uncle, than any we have yet seen," By this artifice, the cunning
magician led Aladdin some way into the country; and as he meant to carry
him farther, to execute his design, he took an opportunity to sit down
in one of the gardens, on the brink of a fountain of clear water, which
discharged itself by a lion's mouth of bronze into a basin, pretending
to be tired: "Come, nephew," said he, "you must be weary as well as I;
let us rest ourselves, and we shall be better able to pursue our walk."
The magician next pulled from his girdle a handkerchief with cakes and
fruit, and during this short repast he exhorted his nephew to leave off
bad company, and to seek that of wise and prudent men, to improve by
their conversation; "for," said he, "you will soon be at man's estate,
and you cannot too early begin to imitate their example." When they had
eaten as much as they liked, they got up, and pursued their walk through
gardens separated from one another only by small ditches, which marked
out the limits without interrupting the communication; so great was the
confidence the inhabitants reposed in each other. By this means the
African magician drew Aladdin insensibly beyond the gardens, and crossed
the country, till they nearly reached the mountains.
At last they arrived between two mountains of moderate height and equal
size, divided by a narrow valley, which was the place where the magician
intended to execute the design that had brought him from Africa to
China. "We will go no farther now," said he to Aladdin; "I will show you
here some extraordinary things, which, when you have seen, you will
thank me for: but while I strike a light, gather up all the loose dry
sticks you can see, to kindle a fire with."
Aladdin found so many dried sticks, that he soon collected a great heap.
The magician presently set them on fire; and when they were in a blaze,
threw in some incense, pronouncing several magical words, which Aladdin
did not understand.
He had scarcely done so when the earth opened just before the magician,
and discovered a stone with a brass ring fixed in it. Aladdin was so
frightened that he would have run away, but the magician caught hold of
him, and gave him such a box on the ear that he knocked him down.
Aladdin got up trembling, and with tears in his eyes said to the
magician, "What have I done, uncle, to be treated in this severe
manner?" "I am your uncle," answered the magician; "I supply the place
of your father, and you ought to make no reply. But child," added he,
softening, "do not be afraid; for I shall not ask anything of you, but
that you obey me punctually, if you would reap the advantages which I
intend you. Know, then, that under this stone there is hidden a
treasure, destined to be yours, and which will make you richer than the
greatest monarch in the world. No person but yourself is permitted to
lift this stone, or enter the cave; so you must punctually execute what
I may command, for it is a matter of great consequence both to you and
me."
Aladdin, amazed at all he saw and heard, forgot what was past, and
rising said, "Well, uncle, what is to be done? Command me, I am ready to
obey." "I am overjoyed, child," said the African magician, embracing
him, "Take hold of the ring, and lift up that stone." "Indeed, uncle,"
replied Aladdin, "I am not strong enough; you must help me." "You have
no occasion for my assistance," answered the magician; "if I help you,
we shall be able to do nothing. Take hold of the ring, and lift it up;
you will find it will come easily." Aladdin did as the magician bade
him, raised the stone with ease, and laid it on one side.
When the stone was pulled up, there appeared a staircase about three or
four feet deep, leading to a door. "Descend, my son," said the African
magician, "those steps, and open that door. It will lead you into a
palace, divided into three great halls. In each of these you will see
four large brass cisterns placed on each side, full of gold and silver;
but take care you do not meddle with them. Before you enter the first
hall, be sure to tuck up your robe, wrap it about you, and then pass
through the second into the third without stopping. Above all things,
have a care that you do not touch the walls so much as with your
clothes; for if you do, you will die instantly. At the end of the third
hall, you will find a door which opens into a garden, planted with fine
trees loaded with fruit. Walk directly across the garden to a terrace,
where you will see a niche before you, and in that niche a lighted lamp.
Take the lamp down and put it out. When you have thrown away the wick
and poured out the liquor, put it in your waistband and bring it to me.
Do not be afraid that the liquor will spoil your clothes, for it is not
oil, and the lamp will be dry as soon as it is thrown out."
After these words the magician drew a ring off his finger, and put it on
one of Aladdin's, saying, "It is a talisman against all evil, so long as
you obey me. Go, therefore, boldly, and we shall both be rich all our
lives."
Aladdin descended the steps, and, opening the door, found the three
halls just as the African magician had described. He went through them
with all the precaution the fear of death could inspire, crossed the
garden without stopping, took down the lamp from the niche, threw out
the wick and the liquor, and, as the magician had desired, put it in his
waistband. But as he came down from the terrace, seeing it was perfectly
dry, he stopped in the garden to observe the trees, which were loaded
with extraordinary fruit of different colours on each tree. Some bore
fruit entirely white, and some clear and transparent as crystal; some
pale red, and others deeper; some green, blue, and purple, and others
yellow; in short, there was fruit of all colours. The white were pearls;
the clear and transparent, diamonds; the deep red, rubies; the paler,
balas rubies; the green, emeralds; the blue, turquoises; the purple,
amethysts; and the yellow, sapphires. Aladdin, ignorant of their value,
would have preferred figs, or grapes, or pomegranates; but as he had his
uncle's permission, he resolved to gather some of every sort. Having
filled the two new purses his uncle had bought for him with his clothes,
he wrapped some up in the skirts of his vest, and crammed his bosom as
full as it could hold.
Aladdin, having thus loaded himself with riches of which he knew not the
value, returned through the three halls with the utmost precaution, and
soon arrived at the mouth of the cave, where the African magician
awaited him with the utmost impatience. As soon as Aladdin saw him, he
cried out, "Pray, uncle, lend me your hand, to help me out." "Give me
the lamp first," replied the magician; "it will be troublesome to you,"
"Indeed, uncle," answered Aladdin, "I cannot now, but I will as soon as
I am up." The African magician was determined that he would have the
lamp before he would help him up; and Aladdin, who had encumbered
himself so much with his fruit that he could not well get at it, refused
to give it to him till he was out of the cave. The African magician,
provoked at this obstinate refusal, flew into a passion, threw a little
of his incense into the fire, and pronounced two magical words, when the
stone which had closed the mouth of the staircase moved into its place,
with the earth over it in the same manner as it lay at the arrival of
the magician and Aladdin.
This action of the magician plainly revealed to Aladdin that he was no
uncle of his, but one who designed him evil. The truth was that he had
learnt from his magic books the secret and the value of this wonderful
lamp, the owner of which would be made richer than any earthly ruler,
and hence his journey to China. His art had also told him that he was
not permitted to take it himself, but must receive it as a voluntary
gift from the hands of another person. Hence he employed young Aladdin,
and hoped by a mixture of kindness and authority to make him obedient to
his word and will. When he found that his attempt had failed, he set out
to return to Africa, but avoided the town, lest any person who had seen
him leave in company with Aladdin should make inquiries after the youth.
Aladdin being suddenly enveloped in darkness, cried, and called out to
his uncle to tell him he was ready to give him the lamp; but in vain,
since his cries could not be heard. He descended to the bottom of the
steps, with a design to get into the palace, but the door, which was
opened before by enchantment, was now shut by the same means. He then
redoubled his cries and tears, sat down on the steps without any hopes
of ever seeing light again, and in an expectation of passing from the
present darkness to a speedy death. In this great emergency he said,
"There is no strength or power but in the great and high God"; and in
joining his hands to pray he rubbed the ring which the magician had put
on his finger. Immediately a genie of frightful aspect appeared, and
said, "What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee. I serve him who
possesses the ring on thy finger; I, and the other slaves of that ring."
At another time Aladdin would have been frightened at the sight of so
extraordinary a figure, but the danger he was in made him answer without
hesitation, "Whoever thou art, deliver me from this place." He had no
sooner spoken these words, than he found himself on the very spot where
the magician had last left him, and no sign of cave or opening, nor
disturbance of the earth. Returning God thanks to find himself once more
in the world, he made the best of his way home. When he got within his
mother's door, the joy to see her and his weakness for want of
sustenance made him so faint that he remained for a long time as dead.
As soon as he recovered, he related to his mother all that had happened
to him, and they were both very vehement in their complaints of the
cruel magician. Aladdin slept very soundly till late the next morning,
when the first thing he said to his mother was, that he wanted something
to eat, and wished she would give him his breakfast. "Alas! child," said
she, "I have not a bit of bread to give you; you ate up all the
provisions I had in the house yesterday; but I have a little cotton
which I have spun; I will go and sell it, and buy bread and something
for our dinner." "Mother," replied Aladdin, "keep your cotton for
another time, and give me the lamp I brought home with me yesterday; I
will go and sell it, and the money I shall get for it will serve both
for breakfast and dinner, and perhaps supper too."
Aladdin's mother took the lamp and said to her son, "Here it is, but it
is very dirty; if it were a little cleaner I believe it would bring
something more." She took some fine sand and water to clean it; but had
no sooner begun to rub it, than in an instant a hideous genie of
gigantic size appeared before her, and said to her in a voice of
thunder, "What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee as thy slave,
and the slave of all those who have that lamp in their hands; I and the
other slaves of the lamp."
Aladdin's mother, terrified at the sight of the genie, fainted; when
Aladdin, who had seen such a phantom in the cavern, snatched the lamp
out of his mother's hand, and said to the genie boldly, "I am hungry,
bring me something to eat." The genie disappeared immediately, and in an
instant returned with a large silver tray, holding twelve covered dishes
of the same metal, which contained the most delicious viands; six large
white bread cakes on two plates, two flagons of wine, and two silver
cups. All these he placed upon a carpet and disappeared; this was done
before Aladdin's mother recovered from her swoon.
Aladdin had fetched some water, and sprinkled it in her face to recover
her. Whether that or the smell of the meat effected her cure, it was not
long before she came to herself. "Mother," said Aladdin, "be not afraid:
get up and eat; here is what will put you in heart, and at the same time
satisfy my extreme hunger."
His mother was much surprised to see the great tray, twelve dishes, six
loaves, the two flagons and cups, and to smell the savoury odour which
exhaled from the dishes. "Child," said she, "to whom are we obliged for
this great plenty and liberality? Has the sultan been made acquainted
with our poverty, and had compassion on us?" "It is no matter, mother,"
said Aladdin, "let us sit down and eat; for you have almost as much need
of a good breakfast as myself; when we have done, I will tell you."
Accordingly, both mother and son sat down and ate with the better relish
as the table was so well furnished. But all the time Aladdin's mother
could not forbear looking at and admiring the tray and dishes, though
she could not judge whether they were silver or any other metal, and the
novelty more than the value attracted her attention.
The mother and son sat at breakfast till it was dinner-time, and then
they thought it would be best to put the two meals together; yet, after
this they found they should have enough left for supper, and two meals
for the next day.
When Aladdin's mother had taken away and set by what was left, she went
and sat down by her son on the sofa, saying, "I expect now that you
should satisfy my impatience, and tell me exactly what passed between
the genie and you while I was in a swoon"; which he readily complied
with.
She was in as great amazement at what her son told her, as at the
appearance of the genie; and said to him, "But, son, what have we to do
with genies? I never heard that any of my acquaintance had ever seen
one. How came that vile genie to address himself to me, and not to you,
to whom he had appeared before in the cave?" "Mother," answered Aladdin,
"the genie you saw is not the one who appeared to me. If you remember,
he that I first saw called himself the slave of the ring on my finger;
and this you saw, called himself the slave of the lamp you had in your
hand; but I believe you did not hear him, for I think you fainted as
soon as he began to speak."
"What!" cried the mother, "was your lamp then the occasion of that
cursed genie's addressing himself rather to me than to you? Ah! my son,
take it out of my sight, and put it where you please. I had rather you
would sell it than run the hazard of being frightened to death again by
touching it; and if you would take my advice, you would part also with
the ring, and not have anything to do with genies, who, as our prophet
has told us, are only devils."
"With your leave, mother," replied Aladdin, "I shall now take care how I
sell a lamp which may be so serviceable both to you and me. That false
and wicked magician would not have undertaken so long a journey to
secure this wonderful lamp if he had not known its value to exceed that
of gold and silver. And since we have honestly come by it, let us make a
profitable use of it, without making any great show, and exciting the
envy and jealousy of our neighbours. However, since the genies frighten
you so much, I will take it out of your sight, and put it where I may
find it when I want it. The ring I cannot resolve to part with; for
without that you had never seen me again; and though I am alive now,
perhaps, if it were gone, I might not be so some moments hence;
therefore, I hope you will give me leave to keep it, and to wear it
always on my finger." Aladdin's mother replied that he might do what he
pleased; for her part, she would have nothing to do with genies, and
never say anything more about them.
By the next night they had eaten all the provisions the genie had
brought; and the next day Aladdin, who could not bear the thoughts of
hunger, putting one of the silver dishes tinder his vest, went out early
to sell it, and addressing himself to a Jew whom he met in the streets,
took him aside, and pulling out the plate, asked him if he would buy it.
The cunning Jew took the dish, examined it, and as soon as he found that
it was good silver, asked Aladdin at how much he valued it. Aladdin, who
had never been used to such traffic, told him he would trust to his
judgment and honour. The Jew was somewhat confounded at this plain
dealing; and doubting whether Aladdin understood the material or the
full value of what he offered to sell, took a piece of gold out of his
purse and gave it him, though it was but the sixtieth part of the worth
of the plate. Aladdin, taking the money very eagerly, retired with so
much haste, that the Jew, not content with the exorbitancy of his
profit, was vexed he had not penetrated into his ignorance, and was
going to run after him, to endeavour to get some change out of the piece
of gold; but he ran so fast, and had got so far, that it would have been
impossible for him to overtake him.
Before Aladdin went home, he called at a baker's, bought some cakes of
bread, changed his money, and on his return gave the rest to his mother,
who went and purchased provisions enough to last them some time. After
this manner they lived, till Aladdin had sold the twelve dishes singly,
as necessity pressed, to the Jew, for the same money; who, after the
first time, durst not offer him less, for fear of losing so good a
bargain. When he had sold the last dish, he had recourse to the tray,
which weighed ten times as much as the dishes, and would have carried it
to his old purchaser, but that it was too large and cumbersome;
therefore he was obliged to bring him home with him to his mother's,
where, after the Jew had examined the weight of the tray, he laid down
ten pieces of gold, with which Aladdin was very well satisfied.
When all the money was spent, Aladdin had recourse again to the lamp. He
took it in his hands, looked for the part where his mother had rubbed it
with the sand, rubbed it also, when the genie immediately appeared, and
said, "What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee as thy slave, and
the slave of all those who have that lamp in their hands; I, and the
other slaves of the lamp." "I am hungry," said Aladdin, "bring me
something to eat." The genie disappeared, and presently returned with a
tray, the same number of covered dishes as before, set them down, and
vanished.
As soon as Aladdin found that their provisions were again expended, he
took one of the dishes, and went to look for his Jew chapman; but
passing by a goldsmith's shop, the goldsmith perceiving him, called to
him, and said, "My lad, I imagine that you have something to sell to the
Jew, whom I often see you visit; but perhaps you do not know that he is
the greatest rogue even among the Jews. I will give you the full worth
of what you have to sell, or I will direct you to other merchants who
will not cheat you."
This offer induced Aladdin to pull his plate from tinder his vest and
show it to the goldsmith; who at first sight saw that it was made of the
finest silver, and asked him if he had sold such as that to the Jew;
when Aladdin told him that he had sold him twelve such, for a piece of
gold each. "What a villain!" cried the goldsmith. "But," added he, "my
son, what is past cannot be recalled. By showing you the value of this
plate, which is of the finest silver we use in our shops, I will let you
see how much the Jew has cheated you."
The goldsmith took a pair of scales, weighed the dish, and assured him
that his plate would fetch by weight sixty pieces of gold, which he
offered to pay down immediately.
Aladdin thanked him for his fair dealing, and never after went to any
other person.
Though Aladdin and his mother had an inexhaustible treasure in their
lamp, and might have had whatever they wished for, yet they lived with
the same frugality as before, and it may easily be supposed that the
money for which Aladdin had sold the dishes and tray was sufficient to
maintain them some time.
During this interval, Aladdin frequented the shops of the principal
merchants, where they sold cloth of gold and silver, linens, silk
stuffs, and jewellery, and, oftentimes joining in their conversation,
acquired a knowledge of the world, and a desire to improve himself. By
his acquaintance among the jewellers, he came to know that the fruits
which he had gathered when he took the lamp were, instead of coloured
glass, stones of inestimable value; but he had the prudence not to
mention this to any one, not even to his mother.
One day as Aladdin was walking about the town, he heard an order
proclaimed, commanding the people to shut up their shops and houses, and
keep within doors while the Princess Buddir al Buddoor, the sultan's
daughter, went to the bath and returned.
This proclamation inspired Aladdin with eager desire to see the
princess's face, which he determined to gratify, by placing himself
behind the door of the bath, so that he could not fail to see her face.
Aladdin had not long concealed himself before the princess came. She was
attended by a great crowd of ladies, slaves, and mutes, who walked on
each side and behind her. When she came within three or four paces of
the door of the bath, she took off her veil, and gave Aladdin an
opportunity of a full view of her face.
The princess was a noted beauty: her eyes were large, lively, and
sparkling; her smile bewitching; her nose faultless; her mouth small;
her lips vermilion. It is not therefore surprising that Aladdin, who had
never before seen such a blaze of charms, was dazzled and enchanted.
After the princess had passed by, and entered the bath, Aladdin quitted
his hiding-place, and went home. His mother perceived him to be more
thoughtful and melancholy than usual; and asked what had happened to
make him so, or if he was ill. He then told his mother all his
adventure, and concluded by declaring, "I love the princess more than I
can express, and am resolved that I will ask her in marriage of the
sultan."
Aladdin's mother listened with surprise to what her son told her; but
when he talked of asking the princess in marriage, she laughed aloud.
"Alas! child," said she, "what are you thinking of? You must be mad to
talk thus."
"I assure you, mother," replied Aladdin, "that I am not mad, but in my
right senses. I foresaw that you would reproach me with folly and
extravagance; but I must tell you once more, that I am resolved to
demand the princess of the sultan in marriage; nor do I despair of
success. I have the slaves of the lamp and of the ring to help me, and
you know how powerful their aid is. And I have another secret to tell
you: those pieces of glass, which I got from the trees in the garden of
the subterranean palace, are jewels of inestimable value, and fit fit
for the greatest monarchs. All the precious stones the jewellers have in
Bagdad are not to be compared to mine for size or beauty; and I am sure
that the offer of them will secure the favour of the sultan. You have a
large porcelain dish fit to hold them; fetch it, and let us see how they
will look, when we have arranged them according to their different
colours."
Aladdin's mother brought the china dish, when he took the jewels out of
the two purses in which he had kept them, and placed them in order,
according to his fancy. But the brightness and lustre they emitted in
the daytime, and the variety of the colours, so dazzled the eyes both of
mother and son, that they were astonished beyond measure. Aladdin's
mother, emboldened by the sight of these rich jewels, and fearful lest
her son should be guilty of greater extravagance, complied with his
request, and promised to go early in the next morning to the palace of
the sultan. Aladdin rose before daybreak, awakened his mother, pressing
her to go to the sultan's palace, and to get admittance, if possible,
before the grand vizier, the other viziers, and the great officers of
state went in to take their seats in the divan, where the sultan always
attended in person.
Aladdin's mother took the china dish, in which they had put the jewels
the day before, wrapped it in two fine napkins, and set forward for the
sultan's palace. When she came to the gates, the grand vizier, the other
viziers, and most distinguished lords of the court were just gone in;
but notwithstanding the crowd of people was great, she got into the
divan, a spacious hall, the entrance into which was very magnificent.
She placed herself just before the sultan, grand vizier, and the great
lords, who sat in council, on his right and left hand. Several causes
were called, according to their order, pleaded and adjudged, until the
time the divan generally broke up, when the sultan, rising, returned to
his apartment, attended by the grand vizier; the other viziers and
ministers of state then retired, as also did all those whose business
had called them thither.
Aladdin's mother, seeing the sultan retire, and all the people depart,
judged rightly that he would not sit again that day, and resolved to go
home; and on her arrival said, with much simplicity, "Son, I have seen
the sultan, and am very well persuaded he has seen me, too, for I placed
myself just before him; but he was so much taken up with those who
attended on all sides of him that I pitied him, and wondered at his
patience. At last I believe he was heartily tired, for he rose up
suddenly, and would not hear a great many who were ready prepared to
speak to him, but went away, at which I was well pleased, for indeed I
began to lose all patience, and was extremely fatigued with staying so
long. But there is no harm done; I will go again to-morrow; perhaps the
sultan may not be so busy."
The next morning she repaired to the sultan's palace with the present,
as early as the day before; but when she came there, she found the gates
of the divan shut. She went six times afterward on the days appointed,
placed herself always directly before the sultan, but with as little
success as the first morning.
On the sixth day, however, after the divan was broken up, when the
sultan returned to his own apartment, he said to his grand vizier; "I
have for some time observed a certain woman, who attends constantly
every day that I give audience, with something wrapped up in a napkin;
she always stands up from the beginning to the breaking up of the
audience, and affects to place herself just before me. If this woman
comes to our next audience, do not fail to call her, that I may hear
what she has to say." The grand vizier made answer by lowering his hand,
and then lifting it up above his head, signifying his willingness to
lose it if he failed.
On the next audience day, when Aladdin's mother went to the divan, and
placed herself in front of the sultan as usual, the grand vizier
immediately called the chief of the mace-bearers, and pointing to her
bade him bring her before the sultan. The old woman at once followed the
mace-bearer, and when she reached the sultan bowed her head down to the
carpet which covered the platform of the throne, and remained in that
posture until he bade her rise, which she had no sooner done, than he
said to her, "Good woman, I have observed you to stand many days from
the beginning to the rising of the divan; what business brings you
here?"
After these words, Aladdin's mother prostrated herself a second time;
and when she arose, said, "Monarch of monarchs, I beg of you to pardon
the boldness of my petition, and to assure me of your pardon and
forgiveness." "Well," replied the sultan, "I will forgive you, be it
what it may, and no hurt shall come to you; speak boldly."
When Aladdin's mother had taken all these precautions, for fear of the
sultan's anger, she told him faithfully the errand on which her son had
sent her, and the event which led to his making so bold a request in
spite of all her remonstrances.
The sultan hearkened to this discourse without showing the least anger;
but before he gave her any answer, asked her what she had brought tied
up in the napkin. She took the china dish which she had set down at the
foot of the throne, untied it, and presented it to the sultan.
The sultan's amazement and surprise were inexpressible, when he saw so
many large, beautiful and valuable jewels collected in the dish. He
remained for some time lost in admiration. At last, when he had
recovered himself, he received the present from Aladdin's mother's hand;
saying, "How rich, how beautiful!" After he had admired and handled all
the jewels one after another, he turned to his grand vizier, and showing
him the dish, said, "Behold, admire, wonder! and confess that your eyes
never beheld jewels so rich and beautiful before." The vizier was
charmed. "Well," continued the sultan, "what sayest thou to such a
present? Is it not worthy of the princess my daughter? And ought I not
to bestow her on one who values her at so great a price?" "I cannot but
own," replied the grand vizier, "that the present is worthy of the
princess; but I beg of your majesty to grant me three months before you
come to a final resolution. I hope, before that time, my son, whom you
have regarded with your favour, will be able to make a nobler present
than this Aladdin, who is an entire stranger to your majesty."
The sultan granted his request, and he said to the old woman, "Good
woman, go home, and tell your son that I agree to the proposal you have
made me; but I cannot marry the princess my daughter for three months;
at the expiration of that time come again."
Aladdin's mother returned home much more gratified than she had
expected, and told her son with much joy the condescending answer she
had received from the sultan's own mouth; and that she was to come to
the divan again that day three months.
Aladdin thought himself the most happy of all men at hearing this news,
and thanked his mother for the pains she had taken in the affair, the
good success of which was of so great importance to his peace, that he
counted every day, week, and even hour as it passed. When two of the
three months were passed, his mother one evening, having no oil in the
house, went out to buy some, and found a general rejoicing--the houses
dressed with foliage, silks, and carpeting, and every one striving to
show their joy according to their ability. The streets were crowded with
officers in habits of ceremony, mounted on horses richly caparisoned,
each attended by a great many footmen. Aladdin's mother asked the oil
merchant what was the meaning of all this preparation of public
festivity. "Whence came you, good woman," said he, "that you don't know
that the grand vizier's son is to marry the Princess Buddir al Buddoor,
the sultan's daughter, to-night? She will presently return from the
bath; and these officers whom you see are to assist at the cavalcade to
the palace, where the ceremony is to be solemnised."
Aladdin's mother, on hearing these news, ran home very quickly. "Child,"
cried she, "you are undone! the sultan's fine promises will come to
nought. This night the grand vizier's son is to marry the Princess
Buddir al Buddoor."
At this account, Aladdin was thunderstruck, and he bethought himself of
the lamp, and of the genie who had promised to obey him; and without
indulging in idle words against the sultan, the vizier, or his son, he
determined, if possible, to prevent the marriage.
When Aladdin had got into his chamber, he took the lamp, rubbed it in
the same place as before, when immediately the genie appeared, and said
to him, "What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee as thy slave;
I, and the other slaves of the lamp." "Hear me," said Aladdin; "thou
hast hitherto obeyed me, but now I am about to impose on thee a harder
task. The sultan's daughter, who was promised me as my bride, is this
night married to the son of the grand vizier. Bring them both hither to
me immediately they retire to their bedchamber."
"Master," replied the genie, "I obey you."
Aladdin supped with his mother as was their wont, and then went to his
own apartment, and sat up to await the return of the genie, according to
his commands.
In the mean time the festivities in honour of the princess's marriage
were conducted in the sultan's palace with great magnificence. The
ceremonies were at last brought to a conclusion, and the princess and
the son of the vizier retired to the bedchamber prepared for them. No
sooner had they entered it, and dismissed their attendants, than the
genie, the faithful slave of the lamp, to the great amazement and alarm
of the bride and bridegroom, took up the bed, and by an agency invisible
to them, transported it in an instant into Aladdin's chamber, where he
set it down. "Remove the bridegroom," said Aladdin to the genie, "and
keep him a prisoner till to-morrow dawn, and then return with him here."
On Aladdin being left alone with the princess, he endeavoured to assuage
her fears, and explained to her the treachery practiced upon him by the
sultan her father. He then laid himself down beside her, putting a drawn
scimitar between them, to show that he was determined to secure her
safety, and to treat her with the utmost possible respect. At break of
day, the genie appeared at the appointed hour, bringing back the
bridegroom, whom by breathing upon he had left motionless and entranced
at the door of Aladdin's chamber during the night, and at Aladdin's
command transported the couch with the bride and bridegroom on it, by
the same invisible agency, into the palace of the sultan.
At the instant that the genie had set down the couch with the bride and
bridegroom in their own chamber, the sultan came to the door to offer
his good wishes to his daughter. The grand vizier's son, who was almost
perished with cold, by standing in his thin under-garment all night, no
sooner heard the knocking at the door than he got out of bed, and ran
into the robing-chamber, where he had undressed himself the night
before.
The sultan having opened the door, went to the bedside, kissed the
princess on the forehead, but was extremely surprised to see her look so
melancholy. She only cast at him a sorrowful look, expressive of great
affliction. He suspected there was something extraordinary in this
silence, and thereupon went immediately to the sultaness's apartment,
told her in what a state he found the princess, and how she had received
him. "Sire," said the sultaness, "I will go and see her; she will not
receive me in the same manner."
The princess received her mother with sighs and tears, and signs of deep
dejection. At last, upon her pressing on her the duty of telling her all
her thoughts, she gave to the sultaness a precise description of all
that happened to her during the night; on which the sultaness enjoined
on her the necessity of silence and discretion, as no one would give
credence to so strange a tale. The grand vizier's son, elated with the
honour of being the sultan's son-in-law, kept silence on his part, and
the events of the night were not allowed to cast the least gloom on the
festivities on the following day, in continued celebration of the royal
marriage.
When night came, the bride and bridegroom were again attended to their
chamber with the same ceremonies as on the preceding evening. Aladdin,
knowing that this would be so, had already given his commands to the
genie of the lamp; and no sooner were they alone than their bed was
removed in the same mysterious manner as on the preceding evening; and
having passed the night in the same unpleasant way, they were in the
morning conveyed to the palace of the sultan. Scarcely had they been
replaced in their apartment, when the sultan came to make his
compliments to his daughter, when the princess could no longer conceal
from him the unhappy treatment she had been subject to, and told him all
that had happened as she had already related it to her mother. The
sultan, on hearing these strange tidings, consulted with the grand
vizier; and finding from him that his son had been subjected to even
worse treatment by an invisible agency, he determined to declare the
marriage to be cancelled, and all the festivities, which were yet to
last for several days, to be countermanded and terminated.
This sudden change in the mind of the sultan gave rise to various
speculations and reports. Nobody but Aladdin knew the secret, and he
kept it with the most scrupulous silence; and neither the sultan nor the
grand vizier, who had forgotten Aladdin and his request, had the least
thought that he had any hand in the strange adventures that befell the
bride and bridegroom.
On the very day that the three months contained in the sultan's promise
expired, the mother of Aladdin again went to the palace, and stood in
the same place in the divan. The sultan knew her again, and directed his
vizier to have her brought before him.
After having prostrated herself, she made answer, in reply to the
sultan: "Sire, I come at the end of three months to ask of you the
fulfillment of the promise you made to my son." The sultan little
thought the request of Aladdin's mother was made to him in earnest, or
that he would hear any more of the matter. He therefore took counsel
with his vizier, who suggested that the sultan should attach such
conditions to the marriage that no one of the humble condition of
Aladdin could possibly fulfill. In accordance with this suggestion of
the vizier, the sultan replied to the mother of Aladdin: "Good woman, it
is true sultans ought to abide by their word, and I am ready to keep
mine, by making your son happy in marriage with the princess my
daughter. But as I cannot marry her without some further proof of your
son being able to support her in royal state, you may tell him I will
fulfill my promise as soon as he shall send me forty trays of massy
gold, full of the same sort of jewels you have already made me a present
of, and carried by the like number of black slaves, who shall be led by
as many young and handsome white slaves, all dressed magnificently. On
these conditions I am ready to bestow the princess my daughter upon him;
therefore, good woman, go and tell him so, and I will wait till you
bring me his answer."
Aladdin's mother prostrated herself a second time before the sultan's
throne, and retired. On her way home, she laughed within herself at her
son's foolish imagination. "Where," said she, "can he get so many large
gold trays, and such precious stones to fill them? It is altogether out
of his power, and I believe he will not be much pleased with my embassy
this time." When she came home, full of these thoughts, she told Aladdin
all the circumstances of her interview with the sultan, and the
conditions on which he consented to the marriage. "The sultan expects
your answer immediately," said she; and then added, laughing, "I believe
he may wait long enough!"
"Not so long, mother, as you imagine," replied Aladdin, "This demand is
a mere trifle, and will prove no bar to my marriage with the princess. I
will prepare at once to satisfy his request."
Aladdin retired to his own apartment and summoned the genie of the lamp,
and required him to prepare and present the gift immediately, before the
sultan closed his morning audience, according to the terms in which it
had been prescribed. The genie professed his obedience to the owner of
the lamp, and disappeared. Within a very short time, a train of forty
black slaves, led by the same number of white slaves, appeared opposite
the house in which Aladdin lived. Each black slave carried on his head a
basin of massy gold, full of pearls, diamonds, rubies, and emeralds.
Aladdin then addressed his mother: "Madam, pray lose no time; before the
sultan and the divan rise, I would have you return to the palace with
this present as the dowry demanded for the princess, that he may judge
by my diligence and exactness of the ardent and sincere desire I have to
procure myself the honour of this alliance."
As soon as this magnificent procession, with Aladdin's mother at its
head, had begun to march from Aladdin's house, the whole city was filled
with the crowds of people desirous to see so grand a sight. The graceful
bearing, elegant form, and wonderful likeness of each slave; their grave
walk at an equal distance from each other, the lustre of their jewelled
girdles, and the brilliancy of the aigrettes of precious stones in their
turbans, excited the greatest admiration in the spectators. As they had
to pass through several streets to the palace, the whole length of the
way was lined with files of spectators. Nothing, indeed, was ever seen
so beautiful and brilliant in the sultan's palace, and the richest robes
of the emirs of his court were not to be compared to the costly dresses
of these slaves, whom they supposed to be kings.
As the sultan, who had been informed of their approach, had given orders
for them to be admitted, they met with no obstacle, but went into the
divan in regular order, one part turning to the right and the other to
the left. After they were all entered, and had formed a semicircle
before the sultan's throne, the black slaves laid the golden trays on
the carpet, prostrated themselves, touching the carpet with their
foreheads, and at the same time the white slaves did the same. When they
rose, the black slaves uncovered the trays, and then all stood with
their arms crossed over their breasts.
In the mean time, Aladdin's mother advanced to the foot of the throne,
and having prostrated herself, said to the sultan, "Sire, my son knows
this present is much below the notice of Princess Buddir al Buddoor; but
hopes, nevertheless, that your majesty will accept of it, and make it
agreeable to the princess, and with the greater confidence since he has
endeavoured to conform to the conditions you were pleased to impose."
The sultan, overpowered at the sight of such more than royal
magnificence, replied without hesitation to the words of Aladdin's
mother: "Go and tell your son that I wait with open arms to embrace him;
and the more haste he makes to come and receive the princess my daughter
from my hands, the greater pleasure he will do me." As soon as Aladdin's
mother had retired, the sultan put an end to the audience; and rising
from his throne ordered that the princess's attendants should come and
carry the trays into their mistress's apartment, whither he went himself
to examine them with her at his leisure. The fourscore slaves were
conducted into the palace; and the sultan, telling the princess of their
magnificent apparel, ordered them to be brought before her apartment,
that she might see through the lattices he had not exaggerated in his
account of them.
In the meantime Aladdin's mother reached home, and showed in her air and
countenance the good news she brought to her son. "My son," said she,
"you may rejoice you are arrived at the height of your desires. The
sultan has declared that you shall marry the Princess Buddir al Buddoor.
He waits for you with impatience."
Aladdin, enraptured with this news, made his mother very little reply,
but retired to his chamber. There he rubbed his lamp, and the obedient
genie appeared. "Genie," said Aladdin, "convey me at once to a bath, and
supply me with the richest and most magnificent robe ever worn by a
monarch." No sooner were the words out of his mouth than the genie
rendered him, as well as himself, invisible, and transported him into a
bath of the finest marble of all sorts of colours; where he was
undressed, without seeing by whom, in a magnificent and spacious hall.
He was then well rubbed and washed with various scented waters. After he
had passed through several degrees of heat, he came out quite a
different man from what he was before. His skin was clear as that of a
child, his body lightsome and free; and when he returned into the hall,
he found, instead of his own poor raiment, a robe, the magnificence of
which astonished him. The genie helped him to dress, and when he had
done, transported him back to his own chamber, where he asked him if he
had any other commands. "Yes," answered Aladdin, "bring me a charger
that surpasses in beauty and goodness the best in the sultan's stables;
with a saddle, bridle, and other caparisons to correspond with his
value. Furnish also twenty slaves, as richly clothed as those who
carried the present to the sultan, to walk by my side and follow me, and
twenty more to go before me in two ranks. Besides these, bring my mother
six women slaves to attend her, as richly dressed at least as any of the
Princess Buddir al Buddoor's, each carrying a complete dress fit for any
sultaness. I want also ten thousand pieces of gold in ten purses; go,
and make haste."
As soon as Aladdin had given these orders, the genie disappeared, but
presently returned with the horse, the forty slaves, ten of whom carried
each a purse containing ten thousand pieces of gold, and six women
slaves, each carrying on her head a different dress for Aladdin's
mother, wrapt up in a piece of silver tissue, and presented them all to
Aladdin.
He presented the six women slaves to his mother, telling her they were
her slaves, and that the dresses they had brought were for her use. Of
the ten purses Aladdin took four, which he gave to his mother, telling
her, those were to supply her with necessaries; the other six he left in
the hands of the slaves who brought them, with an order to throw them by
handfuls among the people as they went to the sultan's palace. The six
slaves who carried the purses he ordered likewise to march before him,
three on the right hand and three on the left.
When Aladdin had thus prepared himself for his first interview with the
sultan, he dismissed the genie, and immediately mounting his charger,
began his march, and though he never was on horseback before, appeared
with a grace the most experienced horseman might envy. The innumerable
concourse of people through whom he passed made the air echo with their
acclamations, especially every time the six slaves who carried the
purses threw handfuls of gold among the populace.
On Aladdin's arrival at the palace, the sultan was surprised to find him
more richly and magnificently robed than he had ever been himself, and
was impressed with his good looks and dignity of manner, which were so
different from what he expected in the son of one so humble as Aladdin's
mother. He embraced him with all the demonstrations of joy, and when he
would have fallen at his feet, held him by the hand, and made him sit
near his throne. He shortly after led him amidst the sounds of trumpets,
hautboys, and all kinds of music, to a magnificent entertainment, at
which the sultan and Aladdin ate by themselves, and the great lords of
the court, according to their rank and dignity, sat at different tables.
After the feast, the sultan sent for the chief cadi, and commanded him
to draw up a contract of marriage between the Princess Buddir al Buddoor
and Aladdin. When the contract had been drawn, the sultan asked Aladdin
if he would stay in the palace and complete the ceremonies of the
marriage that day. "Sire," said Aladdin, "though great is my impatience
to enter on the honour granted me by your majesty, yet I beg you to
permit me first to build a palace worthy to receive the princess your
daughter. I pray you to grant me sufficient ground near your palace, and
I will have it completed with the utmost expedition." The sultan granted
Aladdin his request, and again embraced him. After which he took his
leave with as much politeness as if he had been bred up and had always
lived at court.
Aladdin returned home in the order he had come, amidst the acclamations
of the people, who wished him all happiness and prosperity. As soon as
he dismounted, he retired to his own chamber, took the lamp, and
summoned the genie as usual, who professed his allegiance. "Genie," said
Aladdin, "build me a palace fit to receive the Princess Buddir al
Buddoor. Let its materials be made of nothing less than porphyry,
jasper, agate, lapis lazuli, and the finest marble. Let its walls be
massive gold and silver bricks laid alternately. Let each front contain
six windows, and let the lattices of these (except one, which must be
left unfinished) be enriched with diamonds, rubies, and emeralds, so
that they shall exceed everything of the kind ever seen in the world.
Let there be an inner and outer court in front of the palace, and a
spacious garden; but above all things, provide a safe treasure-house,
and fill it with gold and silver. Let there be also kitchens and
storehouses, stables full of the finest horses, with their equerries and
grooms, and hunting equipage, officers, attendants, and slaves, both men
and women, to form a retinue for the princess and myself. Go and execute
my wishes."
When Aladdin gave these commands to the genie, the sun was set. The next
morning at daybreak the genie presented himself, and, having obtained
Aladdin's consent, transported him in a moment to the palace he had
made. The genie led him through all the apartments, where he found
officers and slaves, habited according to their rank and the services to
which they were appointed. The genie then showed him the treasury, which
was opened by a treasurer, where Aladdin saw large vases of different
sizes, piled up to the top with money, ranged all round the chamber. The
genie thence led him to the stables, where were some of the finest
horses in the world, and the grooms busy in dressing them; from thence
they went to the storehouses, which were filled with all things
necessary, both for food and ornament.
When Aladdin had examined every portion of the palace, and particularly
the hall with the four-and-twenty windows, and found it far to exceed
his fondest expectations, he said, "Genie, there is one thing wanting, a
fine carpet for the princess to walk upon from the sultan's palace to
mine. Lay one down immediately." The genie disappeared, and Aladdin saw
what he desired executed in an instant. The genie then returned, and
carried him to his own home.
When the sultan's porters came to open the gates, they were amazed to
find what had been an unoccupied garden filled up with a magnificent
palace, and a splendid carpet extending to it all the way from the
sultan's palace. They told the strange tidings to the grand vizier, who
informed the sultan, who exclaimed, "It must be Aladdin's palace, which
I gave him leave to build for my daughter. He has wished to surprise us,
and let us see what wonders can be done in only one night."
Aladdin, on his being conveyed by the genie to his own home, requested
his mother to go to the Princess Buddir al Buddoor, and tell her that
the palace would be ready for her reception in the evening. She went,
attended by her women slaves, in the same order as on the preceding day.
Shortly after her arrival at the princess's apartment, the sultan
himself came in, and was surprised to find her, whom he knew as his
suppliant at his divan in such humble guise, to be now more richly and
sumptuously attired than his own daughter. This gave him a higher
opinion of Aladdin, who took such care of his mother, and made her share
his wealth and honours. Shortly after her departure, Aladdin, mounting
his horse, and attended by his retinue of magnificent attendants, left
his paternal home forever, and went to the palace in the same pomp as on
the day before. Nor did he forget to take with him the Wonderful Lamp,
to which he owed all his good fortune, nor to wear the Ring which was
given him as a talisman. The sultan entertained Aladdin with the utmost
magnificence, and at night, on the conclusion of the marriage
ceremonies, the princess took leave of the sultan her father. Bands of
music led the procession, followed by a hundred state ushers, and the
like number of black mutes, in two files, with their officers at their
head. Four hundred of the sultan's young pages carried flambeaux on each
side, which, together with the illuminations of the sultan's and
Aladdin's palaces, made it as light as day. In this order the princess,
conveyed in her litter, and accompanied also by Aladdin's mother,
carried in a superb litter and attended by her women slaves, proceeded
on the carpet which was spread from the sultan's palace to that of
Aladdin. On her arrival Aladdin was ready to receive her at the
entrance, and led her into a large hall, illuminated with an infinite
number of wax candles, where a noble feast was served up. The dishes
were of massy gold, and contained the most delicate viands. The vases,
basins, and goblets were gold also, and of exquisite workmanship, and
all the other ornaments and embellishments of the hall were answerable
to this display. The princess, dazzled to see so much riches collected
in one place, said to Aladdin, "I thought, prince, that nothing in the
world was so beautiful as the sultan my father's palace, but the sight
of this hall alone is sufficient to show I was deceived."
When the supper was ended, there entered a company of female dancers,
who performed, according to the custom of the country, singing at the
same time verses in praise of the bride and bridegroom. About midnight
Aladdin's mother conducted the bride to the nuptial apartment, and he
soon after retired.
The next morning the attendants of Aladdin presented themselves to dress
him, and brought him another habit, as rich and magnificent as that worn
the day before. He then ordered one of the horses to be got ready,
mounted him, and went in the midst of a large troop of slaves to the
sultan's palace to entreat him to take a repast in the princess's
palace, attended by his grand vizier and all the lords of his court. The
sultan consented with pleasure, rose up immediately, and, preceded by
the principal officers of his palace, and followed by all the great
lords of his court, accompanied Aladdin.
The nearer the sultan approached Aladdin's palace, the more he was
struck with its beauty; but when he entered it, came into the hall, and
saw the windows, enriched with diamonds, rubies, emeralds, all large
perfect stones, he was completely surprised, and said to his son-in-law,
"This palace is one of the wonders of the world; for where in all the
world besides shall we find walls built of massy gold and silver, and
diamonds, rubies, and emeralds composing the windows? But what most
surprises me is, that a hall of this magnificence should be left with
one of its windows incomplete and unfinished." "Sire," answered Aladdin,
"the omission was by design, since I wished that you should have the
glory of finishing this hall." "I take your intention kindly," said the
sultan, "and will give orders about it immediately."
After the sultan had finished this magnificent entertainment, provided
for him and for his court by Aladdin, he was informed that the jewellers
and goldsmiths attended; upon which he returned to the hall, and showed
them the window which was unfinished. "I sent for you," said he, "to fit
up this window in as great perfection as the rest. Examine them well,
and make all the dispatch you can."
The jewellers and goldsmiths examined the three-and-twenty windows with
great attention, and after they had consulted together, to know what
each could furnish, they returned, and presented themselves before the
sultan, whose principal jeweller undertaking to speak for the rest,
said, "Sire, we are all willing to exert our utmost care and industry to
obey you; but among us all we cannot furnish jewels enough for so great
a work." "I have more than are necessary," said the sultan; "come to my
palace, and you shall choose what may answer your purpose."
When the sultan returned to his palace, he ordered his jewels to be
brought out, and the jewellers took a great quantity, particularly those
Aladdin had made him a present of, which they soon used, without making
any great advance in their work. They came again several times for more,
and in a month's time had not finished half their work. In short, they
used all the jewels the sultan had, and borrowed of the vizier, but yet
the work was not half done.
Aladdin, who knew that all the sultan's endeavours to make this window
like the rest were in vain, sent for the jewellers and goldsmiths, and
not only commanded them to desist from their work, but ordered them to
undo what they had begun, and to carry all their jewels back to the
sultan and to the vizier. They undid in a few hours what they had been
six weeks about, and retired, leaving Aladdin alone in the hall. He took
the lamp, which he carried about him, rubbed it, and presently the genie
appeared. "Genie," said Aladdin, "I ordered thee to leave one of the
four-and-twenty windows of this hall imperfect, and thou hast executed
my commands punctually; now I would have thee make it like the rest."
The genie immediately disappeared. Aladdin went out of the hall, and
returning soon after, found the window, as he wished it to be, like the
others.
In the mean time, the jewellers and goldsmiths repaired to the palace,
and were introduced into the sultan's presence; where the chief jeweller
presented the precious stones which he had brought back. The sultan
asked them if Aladdin had given them any reason for so doing, and they
answering that he had given them none, he ordered a horse to be brought,
which he mounted, and rode to his son-in-law's palace, with some few
attendants on foot, to inquire why he had ordered the completion of the
window to be stopped. Aladdin met him at the gate, and without giving
any reply to his inquiries conducted him to the grand saloon, where the
sultan, to his great surprise, found the window, which was left
imperfect, to correspond exactly with the others. He fancied at first
that he was mistaken, and examined the two windows on each side, and
afterward all the four-and-twenty; but when he was convinced that the
window which several workmen had been so long about was finished in so
short a time, he embraced Aladdin and kissed him between his eyes. "My
son," said he, "what a man you are to do such surprising things always
in the twinkling of an eye! there is not your fellow in the world; the
more I know, the more I admire you."
The sultan returned to the palace, and after this went frequently to the
window to contemplate and admire the wonderful palace of his son-in-law.
Aladdin did not confine himself in his palace, but went with much state,
sometimes to one mosque, and sometimes to another, to prayers, or to
visit the grand vizier or the principal lords of the court. Every time
he went out, he caused two slaves, who walked by the side of his horse,
to throw handfuls of money among the people as he passed through the
streets and squares. This generosity gained him the love and blessings
of the people, and it was common for them to swear by his head. Thus
Aladdin, while he paid all respect to the sultan, won by his affable
behaviour and liberality the affections of the people.
Aladdin had conducted himself in this manner several years, when the
African magician, who had for some years dismissed him from his
recollection, determined to inform himself with certainty whether he
perished, as he supposed, in the subterranean cave or not. After he had
resorted to a long course of magic ceremonies, and had formed a
horoscope by which to ascertain Aladdin's fate, what was his surprise to
find the appearances to declare that Aladdin, instead of dying in the
cave, had made his escape, and was living in royal splendour, by the aid
of the genie of the wonderful lamp!
On the very next day, the magician set out and travelled with the utmost
haste to the capital of China, where, on his arrival, he took up his
lodgings in a khan.
He then quickly learnt about the wealth, charities, happiness, and
splendid palace of Prince Aladdin. Directly he saw the wonderful fabric,
he knew that none but the genies, the slaves of the lamp, could have
performed such wonders, and, piqued to the quick at Aladdin's high
estate, he returned to the khan.
On his return he had recourse to an operation of geomancy to find out
where the lamp was--whether Aladdin carried it about with him, or where
he left it. The result of his consultation informed him, to his great
joy, that the lamp was in the palace. "Well," said he, rubbing his hands
in glee, "I shall have the lamp, and I shall make Aladdin return to his
original mean condition."
The next day the magician learnt, from the chief superintendent of the
khan where he lodged, that Aladdin had gone on a hunting expedition,
which was to last for eight days, of which only three had expired. The
magician wanted to know no more, He resolved at once on his plans. He
went to a coppersmith, and asked for a dozen copper lamps: the master of
the shop told him he had not so many by him, but if he would have
patience till the next day, he would have them ready. The magician
appointed his time, and desired him to take care that they should be
handsome and well polished.
The next day the magician called for the twelve lamps, paid the man his
full price, put them into a basket hanging on his arm, and went directly
to Aladdin's palace. As he approached, he began crying, "Who will
exchange old lamps for new ones?" As he went along, a crowd of children
collected, who hooted, and thought him, as did all who chanced to be
passing by, a madman or a fool, to offer to change new lamps for old
ones.
The African magician regarded not their scoffs, hootings, or all they
could say to him, but still continued crying, "Who will change old lamps
for new ones?" He repeated this so often, walking backward and forward
in front of the palace, that the princess, who was then in the hall with
the four-and-twenty windows, hearing a man cry something, and seeing a
great mob crowding about him, sent one of her women slaves to know what
he cried.
The slave returned, laughing so heartily that the princess rebuked her.
"Madam," answered the slave, laughing still, "who can forbear laughing,
to see an old man with a basket on his arm, full of fine new lamps,
asking to change them for old ones? the children and mob crowding about
him, so that he can hardly stir, make all the noise they can in derision
of him."
Another female slave hearing this, said, "Now you speak of lamps, I know
not whether the princess may have observed it, but there is an old one
upon a shelf of the Prince Aladdin's robing room, and whoever owns it
will not be sorry to find a new one in its stead. If the princess
chooses, she may have the pleasure of trying if this old man is so silly
as to give a new lamp for an old one, without taking anything for the
exchange."
The princess, who knew not the value of this lamp, and the interest that
Aladdin had to keep it safe, entered into the pleasantry, and commanded
a slave to take it and make the exchange. The slave obeyed, went out of
the hall, and no sooner got to the palace gates than he saw the African
magician, called to him, and showing him the old lamp, said, "Give me a
new lamp for this."
The magician never doubted but this was the lamp he wanted. There could
be no other such in this palace, where every utensil was gold or silver.
He snatched it eagerly out of the slave's hand, and thrusting it as far
as he could into his breast, offered him his basket, and bade him choose
which he liked best. The slave picked out one and carried it to the
princess; but the change was no sooner made than the place rung with the
shouts of the children, deriding the magician's folly.
The African magician stayed no longer near the palace, nor cried any
more, "New lamps for old ones," but made the best of his way to his
khan. His end was answered, and by his silence he got rid of the
children and the mob.
As soon as he was out of sight of the two palaces, he hastened down the
least-frequented streets; and having no more occasion for his lamps or
basket, set all down in a spot where nobody saw him; then going down
another street or two, he walked till he came to one of the city gates,
and pursuing his way through the suburbs, which were very extensive, at
length reached a lonely spot, where he stopped till the darkness of the
night, as the most suitable time for the design he had in contemplation.
When it became quite dark, he pulled the lamp out of his breast and
rubbed it. At that summons the genie appeared, and said, "What wouldst
thou have? I am ready to obey thee as thy slave, and the slave of all
those who have that lamp in their hands, both I and the other slaves of
the lamp." "I command thee," replied the magician, "to transport me
immediately, and the palace which thou and the other slaves of the lamp
have built in this city, with all the people in it, to Africa." The
genie made no reply, but with the assistance of the other genies, the
slaves of the lamp, immediately transported him and the palace, entire,
to the spot whither he had been desired to convey it.
Early the next morning, when the sultan, according to custom, went to
contemplate and admire Aladdin's place, his amazement was unbounded to
find that it could nowhere be seen. He could not comprehend how so large
a palace which he had seen plainly every day for some years, should
vanish so soon, and not leave the least remains behind. In his
perplexity he ordered the grand vizier to be sent for with expedition.
The grand vizier, who, in secret, bore no good will to Aladdin,
intimated his suspicion that the palace was built by magic, and that
Aladdin had made his hunting excursion an excuse for the removal of his
palace with the same suddenness with which it had been erected. He
induced the sultan to send a detachment of his guard, and to have
Aladdin seized as a prisoner of state. On his son-in-law being brought
before him, he would not hear a word from him, but ordered him to be put
to death. The decree caused so much discontent among the people, whose
affection Aladdin had secured by his largesses and charities, that the
sultan, fearful of an insurrection, was obliged to grant him his life.
When Aladdin found himself at liberty, he again addressed the sultan:
"Sire, I pray you to let me know the crime by which I have thus lost the
favour of thy countenance." "Your crime!" answered the sultan, "wretched
man! do you not know it? Follow me, and I will show you." The sultan
then took Aladdin into the apartment from whence he was wont to look at
and admire his palace, and said, "You ought to know where your palace
stood; look, mind, and tell me what has become of it." Aladdin did so,
and being utterly amazed at the loss of his palace, was speechless. At
last recovering himself, he said, "It is true, I do not see the palace.
It is vanished; but I had no concern in its removal. I beg you to give
me forty days, and if in that time I cannot restore it, I will offer my
head to be disposed of at your pleasure." "I give you the time you ask,
but at the end of the forty days, forget not to present yourself before
Aladdin went out of the sultan's palace in a condition of exceeding
humiliation. The lords who had courted him in the days of his splendour,
now declined to have any communication with him. For three days he
wandered about the city, exciting the wonder and compassion of the
multitude by asking everybody he met if they had seen his palace, or
could tell him anything of it. On the third day he wandered into the
country, and as he was approaching a river, he fell down the bank with
so much violence that he rubbed the ring which the magician had given
him so hard by holding on the rock to save himself, that immediately the
same genie appeared whom he had seen in the cave where the magician had
left him. "What wouldst thou have?" said the genie, "I am ready to obey
thee as thy slave, and the slave of all those that have that ring on
their finger; both I and the other slaves of the ring."
Aladdin, agreeably surprised at an offer of help so little expected,
replied, "Genie, show me where the palace I caused to be built now
stands, or transport it back where it first stood." "Your command,"
answered the genie, "is not wholly in my power; I am only the slave of
the ring, and not of the lamp." "I command thee, then," replied Aladdin,
"by the power of the ring, to transport me to the spot where my palace
stands, in what part of the world soever it may be." These words were no
sooner out of his mouth, than the genie transported him into Africa, to
the midst of a large plain, where his palace stood, at no great distance
from a city, and placing him exactly under the window of the princess's
apartment, left him.
Now it so happened that shortly after Aladdin had been transported by
the slave of the ring to the neighbourhood of his palace, that one of
the attendants of the Princess Buddir al Buddoor, looking through the
window, perceived him and instantly told her mistress. The princess, who
could not believe the joyful tidings, hastened herself to the window,
and seeing Aladdin, immediately opened it. The noise of opening the
window made Aladdin turn his head that way, and perceiving the princess,
he saluted her with an air that expressed his joy. "To lose no time,"
said she to him, "I have sent to have the private door opened for you;
enter and come up."
The private door, which was just under the princess's apartment, was
soon opened, and Aladdin conducted up into the chamber. It is impossible
to express the joy of both at seeing each other, after so cruel a
separation. After embracing and shedding tears of joy, they sat down,
and Aladdin said, "I beg of you, princess, to tell me what is become of
an old lamp which stood upon a shelf in my robing-chamber."
"Alas!" answered the princess, "I was afraid our misfortune might be
owing to that lamp; and what grieves me most is, that I have been the
cause of it. I was foolish enough to change the old lamp for a new one,
and the next morning I found myself in this unknown country, which I am
told is Africa."
"Princess," said Aladdin, interrupting her, "you have explained all by
telling me we are in Africa I desire you only to tell me if you know
where the old lamp now is." "The African magician carries it carefully
wrapt up in his bosom," said the princess; "and this I can assure you,
because he pulled it out before me, and showed it to me in triumph."
"Princess," said Aladdin, "I think I have found the means to deliver you
and to regain possession of the lamp, on which all my prosperity
depends; to execute this design it is necessary for me to go to the
town. I shall return by noon, and will then tell you what must be done
by you to insure success. In the mean time, I shall disguise myself, and
beg that the private door may be opened at the first knock."
When Aladdin was out of the palace, he looked round him on all sides,
and perceiving a peasant going into the country, hastened after him; and
when he had overtaken him, made a proposal to him to change clothes,
which the man agreed to. When they had made the exchange, the countryman
went about his business, and Aladdin entered the neighbouring city.
After traversing several streets, he came to that part of the town where
the merchants and artisans had their particular streets according to
their trades. He went into that of the druggists; and entering one of
the largest and best furnished shops, asked the druggist if he had a
certain powder, which he named.
The druggist, judging Aladdin by his habit to be very poor, told him he
had it, but that it was very dear; upon which Aladdin, penetrating his
thoughts, pulled out his purse, and showing him some gold, asked for
half a dram of the powder; which the druggist weighed and gave him,
telling him the price was a piece of gold. Aladdin put the money into
his hand, and hastened to the palace, which he entered at once by the
private door. When he came into the princess's apartments, he said to
her, "Princess, you must take your part in the scheme which I propose
for our deliverance. You must overcome your aversion to the magician,
and assume a most friendly manner toward him, and ask him to oblige you
by partaking of an entertainment in your apartments. Before he leaves,
ask him to exchange cups with you, which he, gratified at the honour you
do him, will gladly do, when you must give him the cup containing this
powder. On drinking it he will instantly fall asleep, and we will obtain
the lamp, whose slaves will do all our bidding, and restore us and the
palace to the capital of China."
The princess obeyed to the utmost her husband's instructions. She
assumed a look of pleasure on the next visit of the magician, and asked
him to an entertainment, which he most willingly accepted. At the close
of the evening, during which the princess had tried all she could to
please him, she asked him to exchange cups with her, and giving the
signal, had the drugged cup brought to her, which she gave to the
magician. He drank it out of compliment to the princess to the very last
drop, when he fell backward lifeless on the sofa.
The princess, in anticipation of the success of her scheme, had so
placed her women from the great hall to the foot of the staircase, that
the word was no sooner given that the African magician was fallen
backward, than the door was opened, and Aladdin admitted to the hall.
The princess rose from her seat, and ran, overjoyed, to embrace him; but
he stopped her, and said, "Princess, retire to your apartment; and let
me be left alone, while I endeavour to transport you back to China as
speedily as you were brought from thence."
When the princess, her women, and slaves were gone out of the hall,
Aladdin shut the door, and going directly to the dead body of the
magician, opened his vest, took out the lamp which was carefully wrapped
up, and rubbing it, the genie immediately appeared. "Genie," said
Aladdin, "I command thee to transport this palace instantly to the place
from whence it was brought hither." The genie bowed his head in token of
obedience, and disappeared. Immediately the palace was transported into
China, and its removal was only felt by two little shocks, the one when
it was lifted up, the other when it was set down, and both in a very
short interval of time.
On the morning after the restoration of Aladdin's palace, the sultan was
looking out of his window, and mourning over the fate of his daughter,
when he thought that he saw the vacancy created by the disappearance of
the palace to be again filled up.
On looking more attentively, he was convinced beyond the power of doubt
that it was his son-in-law's palace. Joy and gladness succeeded to
sorrow and grief. He at once ordered a horse to be saddled, which he
mounted that instant, thinking he could not make haste enough to the
place.
Aladdin rose that morning by daybreak, put on one of the most
magnificent habits his wardrobe afforded, and went up into the hall of
twenty-four windows, from whence he perceived the sultan approaching,
and received him at the foot of the great staircase, helping him to
dismount.
He led the sultan into the princess's apartment. The happy father
embraced her with tears of joy; and the princess, on her side, afforded
similar testimonies of her extreme pleasure. After a short interval,
devoted to mutual explanations of all that had happened, the sultan
restored Aladdin to his favour, and expressed his regret for the
apparent harshness with which he had treated him. "My son," said he, "be
not displeased at my proceedings against you; they arose from my
paternal love, and therefore you ought to forgive the excesses to which
it hurried me." "Sire," replied Aladdin, "I have not the least reason to
complain of your conduct, since you did nothing but what your duty
required. This infamous magician, the basest of men, was the sole cause
of my misfortune."
The African magician, who was thus twice foiled in his endeavour to ruin
Aladdin, had a younger brother, who was as skilful a magician as
himself, and exceeded him in wickedness and hatred of mankind. By mutual
agreement they communicated with each other once a year, however widely
separate might be their place of residence from each other. The younger
brother not having received as usual his annual communication, prepared
to take a horoscope and ascertain his brother's proceedings. He, as well
as his brother, always carried a geomantic square instrument about him;
he prepared the sand, cast the points, and drew the figures. On
examining the planetary crystal, he found that his brother was no longer
living, but had been poisoned; and by another observation, that he was
in the capital of the kingdom of China; also, that the person who had
poisoned him was of mean birth, though married to a princess, a sultan's
daughter.
When the magician had informed himself of his brother's fate, he
resolved immediately to revenge his death, and at once departed for
China; where, after crossing plains, rivers, mountains, deserts, and a
long tract of country without delay, he arrived after incredible
fatigues. When he came to the capital of China, he took a lodging at a
khan. His magic art soon revealed to him that Aladdin was the person who
had been the cause of the death of his brother. He had heard, too, all
the persons of repute in the city talking of a woman called Fatima, who
was retired from the world, and of the miracles she wrought. As he
fancied that this woman might be serviceable to him in the project he
had conceived, he made more minute inquiries, and requested to be
informed more particularly who that holy woman was, and what sort of
miracles she performed.
"What!" said the person whom he addressed, "have you never seen or heard
of her? She is the admiration of the whole town, for her fasting, her
austerities, and her exemplary life. Except Mondays and Fridays, she
never stirs out of her little cell; and on those days on which she comes
into the town she does an infinite deal of good; for there is not a
person who is diseased but she puts her hand on them and cures them."
Having ascertained the place where the hermitage of this holy woman was,
the magician went at night, and, plunging a poniard into her heart,
killed this good woman. In the morning he dyed his face of the same hue
as hers, and arraying himself in her garb, taking her veil, the large
necklace she wore round her waist, and her stick, went straight to the
palace of Aladdin.
As soon as the people saw the holy woman, as they imagined him to be,
they presently gathered about him in a great crowd. Some begged his
blessing, others kissed his hand, and others, more reserved, only the
hem of his garment; while others, suffering from disease, stooped for
him to lay his hands upon them; which he did, muttering some words in
form of prayer, and, in short, counterfeiting so well, that everybody
took him for the holy woman. He came at last to the square before
Aladdin's palace. The crowd and the noise were so great that the
princess, who was in the hall of four-and-twenty windows, heard it, and
asked what was the matter. One of her women told her it was a great
crowd of people collected about the holy woman to be cured of diseases
by the imposition of her hands.
The princess, who had long heard of this holy woman, but had never seen
her, was very desirous to have some conversation with her; which the
chief officer perceiving, told her it was an easy matter to bring her to
her, if she desired and commanded it; and the princess expressing her
wishes, he immediately sent four slaves for the pretended holy woman.
As soon as the crowd saw the attendants from the palace, they made way;
and the magician, perceiving also that they were coming for him,
advanced to meet them, overjoyed to find his plot succeed so well. "Holy
woman," said one of the slaves, "the princess wants to see you, and has
sent us for you." "The princess does me too great an honour," replied
the false Fatima; "I am ready to obey her command," and at the same time
followed the slaves to the palace.
When the pretended Fatima had made her obeisance, the princess said, "My
good mother, I have one thing to request, which you must not refuse me;
it is, to stay with me, that you may edify me with your way of living,
and that I may learn from your good example." "Princess," said the
counterfeit Fatima, "I beg of you not to ask what I cannot consent to
without neglecting my prayers and devotion." "That shall be no hindrance
to you," answered the princess; "I have a great many apartments
unoccupied; you shall choose which you like best, and have as much
liberty to perform your devotions as if you were in your own cell."
The magician, who really desired nothing more than to introduce himself
into the palace, where it would be a much easier matter for him to
execute his designs, did not long excuse himself from accepting the
obliging offer which the princess made him. "Princess," said he,
"whatever resolution a poor wretched woman as I am may have made to
renounce the pomp and grandeur of this world, I dare not presume to
oppose the will and commands of so pious and charitable a princess."
Upon this the princess, rising up, said, "Come with me, I will show you
what vacant apartments I have, that you may make choice of that you like
best." The magician followed the princess, and of all the apartments she
showed him, made choice of that which was the worst, saying that it was
too good for him, and that he only accepted it to please her.
Afterward the princess would have brought him back into the great hall
to make him dine with her; but he, considering that he should then be
obliged to show his face, which he had always taken care to conceal with
Fatima's veil, and fearing that the princess should find out that he was
not Fatima, begged of her earnestly to excuse him, telling her that he
never ate anything but bread and dried fruits, and desiring to eat that
slight repast in his own apartment. The princess granted his request,
saying, "You may be as free here, good mother, as if you were in your
own cell: I will order you a dinner, but remember I expect you as soon
as you have finished your repast."
After the princess had dined, and the false Fatima had been sent for by
one of the attendants, he again waited upon her. "My good mother," said
the princess, "I am overjoyed to see so holy a woman as yourself, who
will confer a blessing upon this palace. But now I am speaking of the
palace, pray how do you like it? And before I show it all to you, tell
me first what you think of this hall."
Upon this question, the counterfeit Fatima surveyed the hall from one
end to the other. When he had examined it well, he said to the princess,
"As far as such a solitary being as I am, who am unacquainted with what
the world calls beautiful, can judge, this hall is truly admirable;
there wants but one thing." "What is that, good mother?" demanded the
princess; "tell me, I conjure you. For my part, I always believed, and
have heard say, it wanted nothing; but if it does, it shall be
supplied."
"Princess," said the false Fatima, with great dissimulation, "forgive me
the liberty I have taken; but my opinion is, if it can be of any
importance, that if a roc's egg were hung up in the middle of the dome,
this hall would have no parallel in the four quarters of the world, and
your palace would be the wonder of the universe."
"My good mother," said the princess, "what is a roc, and where may one
get an egg?" "Princess," replied the pretended Fatima, "it is a bird of
prodigious size, which inhabits the summit of Mount Caucasus; the
architect who built your palace can get you one."
After the princess had thanked the false Fatima for what she believed
her good advice, she conversed with her upon other matters; but could
not forget the roc's egg, which she resolved to request of Aladdin when
next he should visit his apartments. He did so in the course of that
evening, and shortly after he entered, the princess thus addressed him:
"I always believed that our palace was the most superb, magnificent, and
complete in the world: but I will tell you now what it wants, and that
is a roc's egg hung up in the midst of the dome." "Princess," replied
Aladdin, "it is enough that you think it wants such an ornament; you
shall see by the diligence which I use in obtaining it, that there is
nothing which I would not do for your sake."
Aladdin left the Princess Buddir al Buddoor that moment, and went up
into the hall of four-and-twenty windows, where, pulling out of his
bosom the lamp, which after the danger he had been exposed to be always
carried about him, he rubbed it; upon which the genie immediately
appeared. "Genie," said Aladdin, "I command thee, in the name of this
lamp, bring a roc's egg to be hung up in the middle of the dome of the
hall of the palace." Aladdin had no sooner pronounced these words, than
the hall shook as if ready to fall; and the genie said in a loud and
terrible voice, "Is it not enough that I and the other slaves of the
lamp have done everything for you, but you, by an unheard-of
ingratitude, must command me to bring my master, and hang him up in the
midst of this dome? This attempt deserves that you, the princess, and
the palace, should be immediately reduced to ashes; but you are spared
because this request does not come from yourself. Its true author is the
brother of the African magician, your enemy whom you have destroyed. He
is now in your palace, disguised in the habit of the holy woman Fatima,
whom he has murdered; at his suggestion your wife makes this pernicious
demand. His design is to kill you, therefore take care of yourself."
After these words the genie disappeared.
Aladdin resolved at once what to do. He returned to the princess's
apartment, and without mentioning a word of what had happened, sat down,
and complained of a great pain which had suddenly seized his head. On
hearing this, the princess told him how she had invited the holy Fatima
to stay with her, and that she was now in the palace; and at the request
of the prince, ordered her to be summoned to her at once.
When the pretended Fatima came, Aladdin said, "Come hither, good mother;
I am glad to see you here at so fortunate a time. I am tormented with a
violent pain in my head, and request your assistance, and hope you will
not refuse me that cure which you impart to afflicted persons." So
saying, he arose, but held down his head. The counterfeit Fatima
advanced toward him, with his hand all the time on a dagger concealed in
his girdle under his gown; which Aladdin, observing, he snatched the
weapon from his hand, pierced him to the heart with his own dagger, and
then pushed him down on the floor.
"My dear prince, what have you done?" cried the princess, in surprise.
"You have killed the holy woman!" "No, my princess," answered Aladdin
with emotion, "I have not killed Fatima, but a villain, who would have
assassinated me, if I had not prevented him. This wicked man," added he,
uncovering his face, "is the brother of the magician who attempted our
ruin. He has strangled the true Fatima, and disguised himself in her
clothes with intent to murder me." Aladdin then informed her how the
genie had told him these facts, and how narrowly she and the palace had
escaped destruction through his treacherous suggestion which had led to
her request.
Thus was Aladdin delivered from the persecution of the two brothers, who
were magicians. Within a few years afterward, the sultan died in a good
old age, and as he left no male children, the Princess Buddir al Buddoor
succeeded him, and she and Aladdin reigned together many years, and left
a numerous and illustrious posterity.
THE HISTORY OF ALI BABA, AND OF THE FORTY ROBBERS KILLED BY ONE SLAVE
There once lived in a town of Persia two brothers, one named Cassim and
the other Ali Baba. Their father divided a small inheritance equally
between them. Cassim married a very rich wife, and became a wealthy
merchant. Ali Baba married a woman as poor as himself, and lived by
cutting wood, and bringing it upon three asses into the town, to sell.
One day, when Ali Baba was in the forest, and had just cut wood enough
to load his asses, he saw at a distance a great cloud of dust, which
seemed to approach him. He observed it with attention, and distinguished
soon after a body of horsemen, who he suspected might be robbers. He
determined to leave his asses to save himself. He climbed up a large
tree, planted on a high rock, whose branches were thick enough to
conceal him, and yet enabled him to see all that passed without being
discovered.
The troop, who were to the number of forty, all well mounted and armed,
came to the foot of the rock on which the tree stood, and there
dismounted Every man unbridled his horse, tied him to some shrub, and
hung about his neck a bag of corn which they brought behind them. Then
each of them took off his saddle-bag, which seemed to Ali Baba to be
full of gold and silver from its weight. One, whom he took to be their
captain, came under the tree in which Ali Baba was concealed; and making
his way through some shrubs, pronounced these words: "Open, Sesame!"
As soon as the captain of the
robbers had thus spoken, a door opened in the rock; and after he had
made all his troop enter before him, he followed them, when the door
shut again of itself.
The robbers stayed some time within the rock, during which Ali Baba,
fearful of being caught, remained in the tree.
At last the door opened again, and as the captain went in last, so he
came out first, and stood to see them all pass by him; when Ali Baba
heard him make the door close by pronouncing these words, "Shut,
Sesame!" Every man at once went and bridled his horse, fastened his
wallet, and mounted again. When the captain saw them all ready, he put
himself at their head, and they returned the way they had come.
Ali Baba followed them with his eyes as far as he could see them; and
afterward stayed a considerable time before he descended. Remembering
the words the captain of the robbers used to cause the door to open and
shut, he had the curiosity to try if his pronouncing them would have the
same effect. Accordingly, he went among the shrubs, and perceiving the
door concealed behind them, stood before it, and said, "Open, Sesame!"
The door instantly flew wide open.
Ali Baba, who expected a dark, dismal cavern, was surprised to see a
well-lighted and spacious chamber, which received the light from an
opening at the top of the rock, and in which were all sorts of
provisions, rich bales of silk, stuff, brocade, and valuable carpeting,
piled upon one another; gold and silver ingots in great heaps, and money
in bags. The sight of all these riches made him suppose that this cave
must have been occupied for ages by robbers, who had succeeded one
another.
Ali Baba went boldly into the cave, and collected as much of the gold
coin, which was in bags, as he thought his three asses could carry. When
he had loaded them with the bags, he laid wood over them in such a
manner that they could not be seen. When he had passed in and out as
often as he wished, he stood before the door, and pronouncing the words,
"Shut, Sesame!" the door closed of itself. He then made the best of his
way to town.
When Ali Baba got home, he drove his asses into a little yard, shut the
gates very carefully, threw off the wood that covered the panniers,
carried the bags into his house, and ranged them in order before his
wife. He then emptied the bags, which raised such a great heap of gold
as dazzled his wife's eyes, and then he told her the whole adventure
from beginning to end, and, above all, recommended her to keep it
secret.
The wife rejoiced greatly in their good fortune, and would count all the
gold piece by piece. "Wife," replied Ali Baba, "you do not know what you
undertake, when you pretend to count the money; you will never have
done. I will dig a hole, and bury it. There is no time to be lost." "You
are in the right, husband," replied she, "but let us know, as nigh as
possible, how much we have. I will borrow a small measure, and measure
it, while you dig the hole."
Away the wife ran to her brother-in-law Cassim, who lived just by, and
addressing herself to his wife, desired her to lend her a measure for a
little while. Her sister-in-law asked her whether she would have a great
or a small one. The other asked for a small one. She bade her stay a
little, and she would readily fetch one,
The sister-in-law did so, but as she knew Ali Baba's poverty, she was
curious to know what sort of grain his wife wanted to measure, and
artfully putting some suet at the bottom of the measure, brought it to
her, with an excuse that she was sorry that she had made her stay so
long, but that she could not find it sooner.
Ali Baba's wife went home, set the measure upon the heap of gold, filled
it, and emptied it often upon the sofa, till she had done, when she was
very well satisfied to find the number of measures amounted to so many
as they did, and went to tell her husband, who had almost finished
digging the hole. While Ali Baba was burying the gold, his wife, to show
her exactness and diligence to her sister-in-law, carried the measure
back again, but without taking notice that a piece of gold had stuck to
the bottom. "Sister," said she, giving it to her again, "you see that I
have not kept your measure long. I am obliged to you for it, and return
it with thanks."
As soon as Ali Baba's wife was gone, Cassim's looked at the bottom of
the measure, and was in inexpressible surprise to find a piece of gold
sticking to it. Envy immediately possessed her breast. "What!" said she,
"has Ali Baba gold so plentiful as to measure it? Whence has he all this
wealth?"
Cassim, her husband, was at his counting-house. When he came home, his
wife said to him, "Cassim, I know you think yourself rich, but Ali Baba
is infinitely richer than you. He does not count his money, but measures
it." Cassim desired her to explain the riddle, which she did, by telling
him the stratagem she had used to make the discovery, and showed him the
piece of money, which was so old that they could not tell in what
prince's reign it was coined.
Cassim, after he had married the rich widow, had never treated Ali Baba
as a brother, but neglected him; and now, instead of being pleased, he
conceived a base envy at his brother's prosperity. He could not sleep
all that night, and went to him in the morning before sunrise. "Ali
Baba," said he, "I am surprised at you; you pretend to be miserably
poor, and yet you measure gold. My wife found this at the bottom of the
measure you borrowed yesterday."
By this discourse, Ali Baba perceived that Cassim and his wife, through
his own wife's folly, knew what they had so much reason to conceal; but
what was done, could not be undone. Therefore, without showing the least
surprise or trouble, he confessed all, and offered his brother part of
his treasure to keep the secret.
"I expect as much," replied Cassim haughtily; "but I must know exactly
where this treasure is, and how I may visit it myself when I choose;
otherwise, I will go and inform against you, and then you will not only
get no more, but will lose all you have, and I shall have a share for my
information."
Ali Baba told him all he desired, even to the very words he was to use
to gain admission into the cave.
Cassim rose the next morning long before the sun, and set out for the
forest with ten mules bearing great chests, which he designed to fill,
and followed the road which Ali Baba had pointed out to him. He was not
long before he reached the rock, and found out the place, by the tree
and other marks which his brother had given him. When he reached the
entrance of the cavern, he pronounced the words, "Open, Sesame!" The
door immediately opened, and, when he was in, closed upon him. In
examining the cave, he was in great admiration to find much more riches
than he had expected from Ali Baba's relation. He quickly laid as many
bags of gold as he could carry at the door of the cavern; but his
thoughts were so full of the great riches he should possess, that he
could not think of the necessary word to make it open, but instead of
"Sesame," said, "Open, Barley!" and was much amazed to find that the
door remained fast shut. He named several sorts of grain, but still the
door would not open.
Cassim had never expected such an incident, and was so alarmed at the
danger he was in, that the more he endeavoured to remember the word
"Sesame," the more his memory was confounded, and he had as much
forgotten it as if he had never heard it mentioned. He threw down the
bags he had loaded himself with, and walked distractedly up and down the
cave, without having the least regard to the riches that were around
him.
About noon the robbers visited their cave. At some distance they saw
Cassim's mules straggling about the rock, with great chests on their
backs. Alarmed at this, they galloped full speed to the cave. They drove
away the mules, which strayed through the forest so far, that they were
soon out of sight, and went directly, with their naked sabres in their
hands, to the door, which, on their captain pronouncing the proper
words, immediately opened.
Cassim, who heard the noise of the horses' feet, at once guessed the
arrival of the robbers, and resolved to make one effort for his life. He
rushed to the door, and no sooner saw the door open, than he ran out and
threw the leader down, but could not escape the other robbers, who with
their scimitars soon deprived him of life.
The first care of the robbers after this was to examine the cave. They
found all the bags which Cassim had brought to the door, to be ready to
load his mules, and carried them again to their places, but they did not
miss what Ali Baba had taken away before. Then holding a council, and
deliberating upon this occurrence, they guessed that Cassim, when he was
in, could no get out again, but could not imagine how he had learned the
secret words by which alone he could enter. They could not deny the fact
of his being there; and to terrify any person or accomplice who should
attempt the same thing, they agreed to cut Cassim's body into four
quarters--to hang two on one side, and two on the other, within the door
of the cave. They had no sooner taken this resolution than they put it
in execution; and when they had nothing more to detain them, left the
place of their hoards well closed. They mounted their horses, went to
beat the roads again, and to attack the caravans they might meet.
In the mean time, Cassim's wife was very uneasy when night came, and her
husband was not returned. She ran to Ali Baba in great alarm, and said,
"I believe, brother-in-law, that you know Cassim is gone to the forest,
and upon what account; it is now night, and he has not returned; I am
afraid some misfortune has happened to him." Ali Baba told her that she
need not frighten herself, for that certainly Cassim would not think it
proper to come into the town till the night should be pretty far
advanced.
Cassim's wife, considering how much it concerned her husband to keep the
business secret, was the more easily persuaded to believe her
brother-in-law. She went home again, and waited patiently till midnight.
Then her fear redoubled, and her grief was the more sensible because she
was forced to keep it to herself. She repented of her foolish curiosity,
and cursed her desire of prying into the affairs of her brother and
sister-in-law. She spent all the night in weeping; and as soon as it was
day went to them, telling them, by her tears, the cause of her coming.
Ali Baba did not wait for his sister-in-law to desire him to go to see
what was become of Cassim, but departed immediately with his three
asses, begging of her first to moderate her affliction. He went to the
forest, and when he came near the rock, having seen neither his brother
nor the mules in his way, was seriously alarmed at finding some blood
spilt near the door, which he took for an ill omen; but when he had
pronounced the word, and the door had opened, he was struck with horror
at the dismal sight of his brother's body. He was not long in
determining how he should pay the last dues to his brother; but without
adverting to the little fraternal affection he had shown for him, went
into the cave, to find something to enshroud his remains; and having
loaded one of his asses with them, covered them over with wood. The
other two asses he loaded with bags of gold, covering them with wood
also as before; and then bidding the door shut, came away; but was so
cautious as to stop some time at the end of the forest, that he might
not go into the town before night. When he came home, he drove the two
asses loaded with gold into his little yard, and left the care of
unloading them to his wife, while he led the other to his
sister-in-law's house.
Ali Baba knocked at the door, which was opened by Morgiana, a clever,
intelligent slave, who was fruitful in inventions to meet the most
difficult circumstances. When he came into the court, he unloaded the
ass, and taking Morgiana aside, said to her, "You must observe an
inviolable secrecy. Your master's body is contained in these two
panniers. We must bury him as if he had died a natural death. Go now and
tell your mistress. I leave the matter to your wit and skilful devices."
Ali Baba helped to place the body in Cassim's house, again recommended
to Morgiana to act her part well, and then returned with his ass.
Morgiana went out early the next morning to a druggist, and asked for a
sort of lozenge which was considered efficacious in the most dangerous
disorders. The apothecary inquired who was ill? She replied, with a
sigh, "Her good master Cassim himself: and that he could neither eat nor
speak." In the evening Morgiana went to the same druggist's again, and
with tears in her eyes, asked for an essence which they used to give to
sick people only when at the last extremity. "Alas!" said she, taking it
from the apothecary, "I am afraid that this remedy will have no better
effect than the lozenges; and that I shall lose my good master."
On the other hand, as Ali Baba and his wife were often seen to go
between Cassim's and their own house all that day, and to seem
melancholy, nobody was surprised in the evening to hear the lamentable
shrieks and cries of Cassim's wife and Morgiana, who gave out everywhere
that her master was dead. The next morning at daybreak Morgiana went to
an old cobbler whom she knew to be always early at his stall, and
bidding him good-morrow, put a piece of gold into his hand, saying,
"Baba Mustapha, you must bring with you your sewing tackle, and come
with me; but I must tell you, I shall blindfold you when you come to
such a place."
Baba Mustapha seemed to hesitate a little at these words. "Oh! oh!"
replied he, "you would have me do something against my conscience, or
against my honour?" "God forbid," said Morgiana, putting another piece
of gold into his hand, "that I should ask anything that is contrary to
your honour! only come along with me and fear nothing."
Baba Mustapha went with Morgiana, who, after she had bound his eyes with
a handkerchief at the place she had mentioned, conveyed him to her
deceased master's house, and never unloosed his eyes till he had entered
the room where she had put the corpse together. "Baba Mustapha," said
she, "you must make haste and sew the parts of this body together; and
when you have done, I will give you another piece of gold."
After Baba Mustapha had finished his task, she blindfolded him again,
gave him the third piece of gold as she had promised, and recommending
secrecy to him carried him back to the place where she first bound his
eyes, pulled off the bandage, and let him go home, but watched him that
he returned toward his stall, till he was quite out of sight, for fear
he should have the curiosity to return and dodge her; she then went
home. Morgiana, on her return, warmed some water to wash the body, and
at the same time Ali Baba perfumed it with incense, and wrapped it in
the burying clothes with the accustomed ceremonies. Not long after the
proper officer brought the bier, and when the attendants of the mosque,
whose business it was to wash the dead, offered to perform their duty,
she told them that it was done already. Shortly after this the imaun and
the other ministers of the mosque arrived. Four neighbours carried the
corpse to the burying-ground, following the imaun, who recited some
prayers. Ali Baba came after with some neighbours, who often relieved
the others in carrying the bier to the burying-ground. Morgiana, a slave
to the deceased, followed in the procession, weeping, beating her
breast, and tearing her hair. Cassim's wife stayed at home mourning,
uttering lamentable cries with the women of the neighbourhood, who came,
according to custom, during the funeral, and joining their lamentations
with hers filled the quarter far and near with sounds of sorrow.
In this manner Cassim's melancholy death was concealed and hushed up
between Ali Baba, his widow, and Morgiana, his slave, with so much
contrivance that nobody in the city had the least knowledge or suspicion
of the cause of it. Three or four days after the funeral, Ali Baba
removed his few goods openly to his sister-in-law's house, in which it
was agreed that he should in future live; but the money he had taken
from the robbers he conveyed thither by night. As for Cassim's
warehouse, he entrusted it entirely to the management of his eldest son.
While these things were being done, the forty robbers again visited
their retreat in the forest. Great, then, was their surprise to find
Cassim's body taken away, with some of their bags of gold. "We are
certainly discovered," said the captain. "The removal of the body, and
the loss of some of our money, plainly shows that the man whom we killed
had an accomplice: and for our own lives' sake we must try and find him.
What say you, my lads?"
All the robbers unanimously approved of the captain's proposal.
"Well," said the captain, "one of you, the boldest and most skilful
among you, must go into the town, disguised as a traveller and a
stranger, to try if he can hear any talk of the man whom we have killed,
and endeavour to find out who he was, and where he lived. This is a
matter of the first importance, and for fear of any treachery, I propose
that whoever undertakes this business without success, even though the
failure arises only from an error of judgment, shall suffer death."
Without waiting for the sentiments of his companions, one of the robbers
started up, and said, "I submit to this condition, and think it an
honour to expose my life to serve the troop."
After this robber had received great commendations from the captain and
his comrades, he disguised himself so that nobody would take him for
what he was; and taking his leave of the troop that night, went into the
town just at daybreak; and walked up and down, till accidentally he came
to Baba Mustapha's stall, which was always open before any of the shops.
Baba Mustapha was seated with an awl in his hand, just going to work.
The robber saluted him, bidding him good-morrow; and perceiving that he
was old, said, "Honest man, you begin to work very early: is it possible
that one of your age can see so well? I question, even if it were
somewhat lighter, whether you could see to stitch."
"You do not know me," replied Baba Mustapha; "for old as I am, I have
extraordinary good eyes; and you will not doubt it when I tell you that
I sewed the body of a dead man together in a place where I had not so
much light as I have now."
"A dead body!" exclaimed the robber, with affected amazement. "Yes,
yes," answered Baba Mustapha, "I see you want to have me speak out, but
you shall know no more."
The robber felt sure that he had discovered what he sought. He pulled
out a piece of gold, and putting it into Baba Mustapha's hand, said to
him, "I do not want to learn your secret, though I can assure you you
might safely trust me with it. The only thing I desire of you is to show
me the house where you stitched up the dead body."
"If I were disposed to do you that favour," replied Baba Mustapha, "I
assure you I cannot. I was taken to a certain place, whence I was led
blindfold to the house, and afterward brought back again in the same
manner; you see, therefore, the impossibility of my doing what you
desire."
"Well," replied the robber, "you may, however, remember a little of the
way that you were led blindfold. Come, let me blind your eyes at the
same place. We will walk together; perhaps you may recognise some part;
and as everybody ought to be paid for their trouble, there is another
piece of gold for you; gratify me in what I ask you." So saying, he put
another piece of gold into his hand.
The two pieces of gold were great temptations to Baba Mustapha. He
looked at them a long time in his hand, without saying a word, but at
last he pulled out his purse and put them in. "I cannot promise," said
he to the robber, "that I can remember the way exactly; but since you
desire, I will try what I can do." At these words Baba Mustapha rose up,
to the great joy of the robber, and led him to the place where Morgiana
had bound his eyes. "It was here," said Baba Mustapha, "I was
blindfolded; and I turned this way." The robber tied his handkerchief
over his eyes, and walked by him till he stopped directly at Cassim's
house, where Ali Baba then lived. The thief, before he pulled off the
band, marked the door with a piece of chalk, which he had ready in his
hand, and then asked him if he knew whose house that was; to which Baba
Mustapha replied that as he did not live in that neighbourhood, he could
not tell.
The robber, finding he could discover no more from Baba Mustapha,
thanked him for the trouble he had taken, and left him to go back to his
stall, while he returned to the forest, persuaded that he should be very
well received.
A little after the robber and Baba Mustapha had parted, Morgiana went
out of Ali Baba's house upon some errand, and upon her return, seeing
the mark the robber had made, stopped to observe it. "What can be the
meaning of this mark?" said she to herself; "somebody intends my master
no good: however, with whatever intention it was done, it is advisable
to guard against the worst." Accordingly, she fetched a piece of chalk,
and marked two or three doors on each side, in the same manner, without
saying a word to her master or mistress.
In the mean time, the robber rejoined his troop in the forest, and
recounted to them his success; expatiating upon his good fortune, in
meeting so soon with the only person who could inform him of what he
wanted to know. All the robbers listened to him with the utmost
satisfaction; when the captain, after commending his diligence,
addressing himself to them all, said, "Comrades, we have no time to
lose: let us set off well armed, without its appearing who we are; but
that we may not excite any suspicion, let only one or two go into the
town together, and join at our rendezvous, which shall be the great
square. In the mean time, our comrade who brought us the good news and I
will go and find out the house, that we may consult what had best be
done."
This speech and plan was approved of by all, and they were soon ready.
They filed off in parties of two each, after some interval of time, and
got into the town without being in the least suspected. The captain, and
he who had visited the town in the morning as spy, came in the last. He
led the captain into the street where he had marked Ali Baba's
residence; and when they came to the first of the houses which Morgiana
had marked, he pointed it out. But the captain observed that the next
door was chalked in the same manner and in the same place; and showing
it to his guide, asked him which house it was, that, or the first. The
guide was so confounded, that he knew not what answer to make; but still
more puzzled, when he and the captain saw five or six houses similarly
marked. He assured the captain, with an oath, that he had marked but
one, and could not tell who had chalked the rest, so that he could not
distinguish the house which the cobbler had stopped at.
The captain, finding that their design had proved abortive, went
directly to the place of meeting, and told his troop that they had lost
their labour, and must return to their cave. He himself set them the
example, and they all returned as they had come.
When the troop was all got together, the captain told them the reason of
their returning; and presently the conductor was declared by all worthy
of death. He condemned himself, acknowledging that he ought to have
taken better precaution, and prepared to receive the stroke from him who
was appointed to cut off his head.
But as the safety of the troop required the discovery of the second
intruder into the cave, another of the gang, who promised himself that
he should succeed better, presented himself, and his offer being
accepted, he went and corrupted Baba Mustapha, as the other had done;
and being shown the house, marked it in a place more remote from sight,
with red chalk.
Not long after, Morgiana, whose eyes nothing could escape, went out, and
seeing the red chalk, and arguing with herself as she had done before,
marked the other neighbours' houses in the same place and manner.
The robber, at his return to his company, valued himself much on the
precaution he had taken, which he looked upon as an infallible way of
distinguishing Ali Baba's house from the others; and the captain and all
of them thought it must succeed. They conveyed themselves into the town
with the same precaution as before; but when the robber and his captain
came to the street, they found the same difficulty; at which the captain
was enraged, and the robber in as great confusion as his predecessor.
Thus the captain and his troop were forced to retire a second time, and
much more dissatisfied; while the robber who had been the author of the
mistake underwent the same punishment, to which he willingly submitted.
The captain, having lost two brave fellows of his troop, was afraid of
diminishing it too much by pursuing this plan to get information of the
residence of their plunderer. He found by their example that their heads
were not so good as their hands on such occasions; and therefore
resolved to take upon himself the important commission.
Accordingly, he went and addressed himself to Baba Mustapha, who did him
the same service he had done to the other robbers. He did not set any
particular mark on the house, but examined and observed it so carefully,
by passing often by it, that it was impossible for him to mistake it.
The captain, well satisfied with his attempt, and informed of what he
wanted to know, returned to the forest; and when he came into the cave,
where the troop waited for him, said, "Now, comrades, nothing can
prevent our full revenge, as I am certain of the house; and in my way
hither I have thought how to put it into execution, but if any one can
form a better expedient, let him communicate it." He then told them his
contrivance; and as they approved of it, ordered them to go into the
villages about, and buy nineteen mules, with thirty-eight large leather
jars, one full of oil, and the others empty.
In two or three days' time the robbers had purchased the mules and jars,
and as the mouths of the jars were rather too narrow for his purpose,
the captain caused them to be widened, and after having put one of his
men into each, with the weapons which he thought fit, leaving open the
seam which had been undone to leave them room to breathe, he rubbed the
jars on the outside with oil from the full vessel.
Things being thus prepared, when the nineteen mules were loaded with
thirty-seven robbers in jars, and the jar of oil, the captain, as their
driver, set out with them, and reached the town by the dusk of the
evening, as he had intended. He led them through the streets, till he
came to Ali Baba's, at whose door he designed to have knocked; but was
prevented by his sitting there after supper to take a little fresh air.
He stopped his mules, addressed himself to him, and said, "I have
brought some oil a great way, to sell at tomorrow's market; and it is
now so late that I do not know where to lodge. If I should not be
troublesome to you, do me the favour to let me pass the night with you,
and I shall be very much obliged by your hospitality."
Though Ali Baba had seen the captain of the robbers in the forest, and
had heard him speak, it was impossible to know him in the disguise of an
oil merchant. He told him he should be welcome, and immediately opened
his gates for the mules to go into the yard. At the same time he called
to a slave, and ordered him, when the mules were unloaded, to put them
into the stable, and to feed them; and then went to Morgiana, to bid her
get a good supper for his guest. After they had finished supper, Ali
Baba, charging Morgiana afresh to take care of his guest, said to her,
"To-morrow morning I design to go to the bath before day; take care my
bathing linen be ready, give them to Abdalla (which was the slave's
name), and make me some good broth against my return." After this he
went to bed.
In the mean time the captain of the robbers went into the yard, and took
off the lid of each jar, and gave his people orders what to do.
Beginning at the first jar, and so on to the last, he said to each man:
"As soon as I throw some stones out of the chamber window where I lie,
do not fail to come out, and I will immediately join you." After this he
returned into the house, when Morgiana, taking up a light, conducted him
to his chamber, where she left him; and he, to avoid any suspicion, put
the light out soon after, and laid himself down in his clothes, that he
might be the more ready to rise.
Morgiana, remembering Ali Baba's orders, got his bathing linen ready,
and ordered Abdalla to set on the pot for the broth; but while she was
preparing it the lamp went out, and there was no more oil in the house,
nor any candles. What to do she did not know, for the broth must be
made. Abdalla, seeing her very uneasy, said, "Do not fret and tease
yourself, but go into the yard, and take some oil out of one of the
jars."
Morgiana thanked Abdalla for his advice, took the oil-pot, and went into
the yard; when, as she came nigh the first jar, the robber within said
softly, "Is it time?"
Though naturally much surprised at finding a man in the jar instead of
the oil she wanted, she immediately felt the importance of keeping
silence, as Ali Baba, his family, and herself were in great danger; and
collecting herself, without showing the least emotion, she answered,
"Not yet, but presently." She went quietly in this manner to all the
jars, giving the same answer, till she came to the jar of oil.
By this means Morgiana found that her master Ali Baba had admitted
thirty-eight robbers into his house, and that this pretended oil
merchant was their captain. She made what haste she could to fill her
oil-pot, and returned into her kitchen, where, as soon as she had
lighted her lamp, she took a great kettle, went again to the oil-jar,
filled the kettle, set it on a large wood fire, and as soon as it boiled
went and poured enough into every jar to stifle and destroy the robber
within.
When this action, worthy of the courage of Morgiana, was executed
without any noise, as she had projected, she returned into the kitchen
with the empty kettle; and having put out the great fire she had made to
boil the oil, and leaving just enough to make the broth, put out the
lamp also, and remained silent, resolving not to go to rest till she had
observed what might follow through a window of the kitchen, which opened
into the yard.
She had not waited long before the captain of the robbers got up, opened
the window, and finding no light, and hearing no noise, or any one
stirring in the house, gave the appointed signal, by throwing little
stones, several of which hit the jars, as he doubted not by the sound
they gave. He then listened, but not hearing or perceiving anything
whereby he could judge that his companions stirred, he began to grow
very uneasy, threw stones again a second and also a third time, and
could not comprehend the reason that none of them should answer his
signal. Much alarmed, he went softly down into the yard, and going to
the first jar, while asking the robber, whom he thought alive, if he was
in readiness, smelt the hot boiled oil, which sent forth a steam out of
the jar. Hence he suspected that his plot to murder Ali Baba, and
plunder his house, was discovered. Examining all the jars, one after
another, he found that all his gang were dead; and, enraged to despair
at having failed in his design, he forced the lock of a door that led
from the yard to the garden, and climbing over the walls made his
escape.
When Morgiana saw him depart, she went to bed, satisfied and pleased to
have succeeded so well in saving her master and family.
Ali Baba rose before day, and, followed by his slave, went to the baths,
entirely ignorant of the important event which had happened at home.
When he returned from the baths, he was very much surprised to see the
oil-jars, and that the merchant was not gone with the mules. He asked
Morgiana, who opened the door, the reason of it. "My good master,"
answered she, "God preserve you and all your family. You will be better
informed of what you wish to know when you have seen what I have to show
you, if you will follow me."
As soon as Morgiana had shut the door, Ali Baba followed her, when she
requested him to look into the first jar, and see if there was any oil.
Ali Baba did so, and seeing a man, started back in alarm, and cried out.
"Do not be afraid," said Morgiana "the man you see there can neither do
you nor anybody else any harm. He is dead." "Ah, Morgiana," said Ali
Baba, "what is it you show me? Explain yourself." "I will," replied
Morgiana. "Moderate your astonishment, and do not excite the curiosity
of your neighbours; for it is of great importance to keep this affair
secret. Look into all the other jars."
Ali Baba examined all the other jars, one after another; and when he
came to that which had the oil in it, found it prodigiously sunk, and
stood for some time motionless, sometimes looking at the jars, and
sometimes at Morgiana, without saying a word, so great was his surprise.
At last, when he had recovered himself, he said, "And what is become of
the merchant?"
"Merchant!" answered she; "he is as much one as I am. I will tell you
who he is, and what is become of him; but you had better hear the story
in your own chamber; for it is time for your health that you had your
broth after your bathing."
Morgiana then told him all she had done, from the first observing the
mark upon the house, to the destruction of the robbers, and the flight
of their captain.
On hearing of these brave deeds from the lips of Morgiana, Ali Baba said
to her--"God, by your means, has delivered me from the snares these
robbers laid for my destruction. I owe, therefore, my life to you; and,
for the first token of my acknowledgment, give you your liberty from
this moment, till I can complete your recompense as I intend."
Ali Baba's garden was very long, and shaded at the further end by a
great number of large trees. Near these he and the slave Abdalla dug a
trench, long and wide enough to hold the bodies of the robbers; and as
the earth was light, they were not long in doing it. When this was done,
Ali Baba hid the jars and weapons; and as he had no occasion for the
mules, he sent them at different times to be sold in the market by his
slave.
While Ali Baba took these measures, the captain of the forty robbers
returned to the forest with inconceivable mortification. He did not stay
long; the loneliness of the gloomy cavern became frightful to him. He
determined, however, to avenge the fate of his companions, and to
accomplish the death of Ali Baba. For this purpose he returned to the
town, and took a lodging in a khan, and disguised himself as a merchant
in silks. Under this assumed character, he gradually conveyed a great
many sorts of rich stuffs and fine linen to his lodging from the cavern,
but with all the necessary precautions to conceal the place whence he
brought them. In order to dispose of the merchandise, when he had thus
amassed them together, he took a warehouse, which happened to be
opposite to Cassim's, which Ali Baba's son had occupied since the death
of his uncle.
He took the name of Cogia Houssain, and, as a new-comer, was, according
to custom, extremely civil and complaisant to all the merchants his
neighbours. Ali Baba's son was, from his vicinity, one of the first to
converse with Cogia Houssain, who strove to cultivate his friendship
more particularly. Two or three days after he was settled, Ali Baba came
to see his son, and the captain of the robbers recognised him at once,
and soon learned from his son who he was. After this he increased his
assiduities, caressed him in the most engaging manner, made him some
small presents, and often asked him to dine and sup with him, when he
treated him very handsomely.
Ali Baba's son did not choose to lie under such obligation to Cogia
Houssain; but was so much straitened for want of room in his house, that
he could not entertain him. He therefore acquainted his father, Ali
Baba, with his wish to invite him in return.
Ali Baba with great pleasure took the treat upon himself. "Son," said
he, "to-morrow being Friday, which is a day that the shops of such great
merchants as Cogia Houssain and yourself are shut, get him to accompany
you, and as you pass by my door, call in. I will go and order Morgiana
to provide a supper."
The next day Ali Baba's son and Cogia Houssain met by appointment, took
their walk, and as they returned, Ali Baba's son led Cogia Houssain
through the street where his father lived, and when they came to the
house, stopped and knocked at the door. "This, sir," said he, "is my
father's house, who, from the account I have given him of your
friendship, charged me to procure him the honour of your acquaintance;
and I desire you to add this pleasure to those for which I am already
indebted to you."
Though it was the sole aim of Cogia Houssain to introduce himself into
Ali Baba's house, that he might kill him, without hazarding his own life
or making any noise, yet he excused himself, and offered to take his
leave; but a slave having opened the door, Ali Baba's son took him
obligingly by the hand, and, in a manner, forced him in.
Ali Baba received Cogia Houssain with a smiling countenance, and in the
most obliging manner he could wish. He thanked him for all the favours
he had done his son; adding withal, the obligation was the greater, as
he was a young man, not much acquainted with the world, and that he
might contribute to his information.
Cogia Houssain returned the compliment by assuring Ali Baba that though
his son might not have acquired the experience of older men, he had good
sense equal to the experience of many others. After a little more
conversation on different subjects, he offered again to take his leave,
when Ali Baba, stopping him, said, "Where are you going, sir, in so much
haste? I beg you would do me the honour to sup with me, though my
entertainment may not be worthy your acceptance; such as it is, I
heartily offer it." "Sir," replied Cogia Houssain, "I am thoroughly
persuaded of your good-will; but the truth is, I can eat no victuals
that have any salt in them; therefore judge how I should feel at your
table." "If that is the only reason," said Ali Baba, "it ought not to
deprive me of the honour of your company; for, in the first place, there
is no salt ever put into my bread, and as to the meat we shall have
to-night, I promise you there shall be none in that. Therefore you must
do me the favour to stay. I will return immediately."
Ali Baba went into the kitchen, and ordered Morgiana to put no salt to
the meat that was to be dressed that night; and to make quickly two or
three ragouts besides what he had ordered, but be sure to put no salt in
them.
Morgiana, who was always ready to obey her master, could not help being
surprised at his strange order. "Who is this strange man," said she,
"who eats no salt with his meat? Your supper will be spoiled, if I keep
it back so long." "Do not be angry, Morgiana," replied Ali Baba; "he is
an honest man, therefore do as I bid you."
Morgiana obeyed, though with no little reluctance, and had a curiosity
to see this man who ate no salt. To this end, when she had finished what
she had to do in the kitchen, she helped Abdalla to carry up the dishes;
and looking at Cogia Houssain, knew him at first sight, notwithstanding
his disguise, to be the captain of the robbers, and examining him very
carefully, perceived that he had a dagger under his garment. "I am not
in the least amazed," said she to herself, "that this wicked man, who is
my master's greatest enemy, would eat no salt with him, since he intends
to assassinate him; but I will prevent him."
Morgiana, while they were at supper, determined in her own mind to
execute one of the boldest acts ever meditated. When Abdalla came for
the dessert of fruit, and had put it with the wine and glasses before
Ali Baba, Morgiana retired, dressed herself neatly, with a suitable
head-dress like a dancer, girded her waist with a silver-gilt girdle, to
which there hung a poniard with a hilt and guard of the same metal, and
put a handsome mask on her face. When she had thus disguised herself,
she said to Abdalla, "Take your tabour, and let us go and divert our
master and his son's friend, as we do sometimes when he is alone."
Abdalla took his tabour and played all the way into the hall before
Morgiana, who, when she came to the door, made a low obeisance by way of
asking leave to exhibit her skill, while Abdalla left off playing. "Come
in, Morgiana," said Ali Baba, "and let Cogia Houssain see what you can
do, that he may tell us what he thinks of your performance."
Cogia Houssain, who did not expect this diversion after supper, began to
fear he should not be able to take advantage of the opportunity he
thought he had found; but hoped, if he now missed his aim, to secure it
another time, by keeping up a friendly correspondence with the father
and son; therefore, though he could have wished Ali Baba would have
declined the dance, he pretended to be obliged to him for it, and had
the complaisance to express his satisfaction at what he said, which
pleased his host.
As soon as Abdalla saw that Ali Baba and Cogia Houssain had done
talking, he began to play on the tabour, and accompanied it with an air,
to which Morgiana, who was an excellent performer, danced in such a
manner as would have created admiration in any company.
After she had danced several dances with much grace, she drew the
poniard, and holding it in her hand, began a dance, in which she outdid
herself by the many different figures, light movements, and the
surprising leaps and wonderful exertions with which she accompanied it.
Sometimes she presented the poniard to one breast, sometimes to another,
and oftentimes seemed to strike her own. At last, she snatched the
tabour from Abdalla with her left hand, and holding the dagger in her
right presented the other side of the tabour, after the manner of those
who get a livelihood by dancing, and solicit the liberality of the
spectators.
Ali Baba put a piece of gold into the tabour, as did also his son; and
Cogia Houssain seeing that she was coming to him, had pulled his purse
out of his bosom to make her a present; but while he was putting his
hand into it, Morgiana, with a courage and resolution worthy of herself,
plunged the poniard into his heart.
Ali Baba and his son, shocked at this action, cried out aloud. "Unhappy
woman!" exclaimed Ali Baba, "what have you done to ruin me and my
family?" "It was to preserve, not to ruin you," answered Morgiana; "for
see here," continued she, opening the pretended Cogia Houssain's
garment, and showing the dagger, "what an enemy you had entertained?
Look well at him, and you will find him to be both the fictitious oil
merchant, and the captain of the gang of forty robbers. Remember, too,
that he would eat no salt with you; and what would you have more to
persuade you of his wicked design? Before I saw him, I suspected him as
soon as you told me you had such a guest. I knew him, and you now find
that my suspicion was not groundless."
Ali Baba, who immediately felt the new obligation he had to Morgiana for
saving his life a second time, embraced her: "Morgiana," said he, "I
gave you your liberty, and then promised you that my gratitude should
not stop there, but that I would soon give you higher proofs of its
sincerity, which I now do by making you my daughter-in-law." Then
addressing himself to his son, he said, "I believe you, son, to be so
dutiful a child, that you will not refuse Morgiana for your wife. You
see that Cogia Houssain sought your friendship with a treacherous design
to take away my life; and if he had succeeded, there is no doubt but he
would have sacrificed you also to his revenge. Consider, that by
marrying Morgiana you marry the preserver of my family and your own,"
The son, far from showing any dislike, readily consented to the
marriage; not only because he would not disobey his father, but also
because it was agreeable to his inclination. After this they thought of
burying the captain of the robbers with his comrades, and did it so
privately that nobody discovered their bones till many years after, when
no one had any concern in the publication of this remarkable history. A
few days afterward, Ali Baba celebrated the nuptials of his son and
Morgiana with great solemnity, a sumptuous feast, and the usual dancing
and spectacles; and had the satisfaction to see that his friends and
neighbours, whom he invited, had no knowledge of the true motives of the
marriage; but that those who were not unacquainted with Morgiana's good
qualities commended his generosity and goodness of heart Ali Baba did
not visit the robbers' cave for a whole year, as he supposed the other
two, whom he could get no account of, might be alive.
At the year's end, when he found they had not made any attempt to
disturb him, he had the curiosity to make another journey. He mounted
his horse, and when he came to the cave he alighted, tied his horse to a
tree, then approaching the entrance, and pronouncing the words, "Open,
Sesame!" the door opened. He entered the cavern, and by the condition he
found things in, judged that nobody had been there since the captain had
fetched the goods for his shop. From this time he believed he was the
only person in the world who had the secret of opening the cave, and
that all the treasure was at his sole disposal. He put as much gold into
his saddle-bag as his horse would carry, and returned to town. Some
years later he carried his son to the cave and taught him the secret,
which he handed down to his posterity, who, using their good fortune
with moderation, lived in great honour and splendour.
THE SECOND VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SAILOR
I designed, after my first voyage, to spend the rest of my days at
Bagdad, but it was not long ere I grew weary of an indolent life, and I
put to sea a second time, with merchants of known probity. We embarked
on board a good ship, and, after recommending ourselves to God, set
sail. We traded from island to island, and exchanged commodities with
great profit. One day we landed on an island covered with several sorts
of fruit trees, but we could see neither man nor animal. We walked in
the meadows, along the streams that watered them. While some diverted
themselves with gathering flowers, and others fruits, I took my wine and
provisions, and sat down near a stream betwixt two high trees, which
formed a thick shade. I made a good meal, and afterward fell asleep. I
cannot tell how long I slept, but when I awoke the ship was gone.
In this sad condition, I was ready to die with grief. I cried out in
agony, beat my head and breast, and threw myself upon the ground, where
I lay some time in despair. I upbraided myself a hundred times for not
being content with the produce of my first voyage, that might have
sufficed me all my life. But all this was in vain, and my repentance
came too late. At last I resigned myself to the will of God. Not knowing
what to do, I climbed up to the top of a lofty tree, from whence I
looked about on all sides, to see if I could discover anything that
could give me hopes. When I gazed toward the sea I could see nothing but
sky and water; but looking over the land, I beheld something white; and
coming down, I took what provision I had left and went toward it, the
distance being so great, that I could not distinguish what it was.
As I approached, I thought it to be a white dome, of a prodigious height
and extent; and when I came up to it, I touched it, and found it to be
very smooth. I went round to see if it was open on any side, but saw it
was not, and that there was no climbing up to the top, as it was so
smooth. It was at least fifty paces round.
By this time the sun was about to set, and all of a sudden the sky
became as dark as if it had been covered with a thick cloud. I was much
astonished at this sudden darkness, but much more when I found it
occasioned by a bird of a monstrous size, that came flying toward me. I
remembered that I had often heard mariners speak of a miraculous bird
called the Roc, and conceived that the great dome which I so much
admired must be its egg. In short, the bird alighted, and sat over the
egg. As I perceived her coming, I crept close to the egg, so that I had
before me one of the legs of the bird, which was as big as the trunk of
a tree. I tied myself strongly to it with my turban, in hopes that the
roc next morning would carry me with her out of this desert island.
After having passed the night in this condition, the bird flew away as
soon as it was daylight, and carried me so high, that I could not
discern the earth; she afterward descended with so much rapidity that I
lost my senses. But when I found myself on the ground, I speedily untied
the knot, and had scarcely done so, when the roc, having taken up a
serpent of a monstrous length in her bill, flew away.
The spot where it left me was encompassed on all sides by mountains,
that seemed to reach above the clouds, and so steep that there was no
possibility of getting out of the valley. This was a new perplexity; so
that when I compared this place with the desert island from which the
roc had brought me, I found that I had gained nothing by the change.
As I walked through this valley, I perceived it was strewed with
diamonds, some of which were of surprising bigness. I took pleasure in
looking upon them; but shortly saw at a distance such objects as greatly
diminished my satisfaction, and which I could not view without terror,
namely, a great number of serpents, so monstrous that the least of them
was capable of swallowing an elephant. They retired in the day-time to
their dens, where they hid themselves from the roc, their enemy, and
came out only in the night.
I spent the day in walking about in the valley, resting myself at times
in such places as I thought most convenient. When night came on I went
into I cave, where I thought I might repose in safety. I secured the
entrance, which was low and narrow, with a great stone, to preserve me
from the serpents; but not so far as to exclude the light. I supped on
part of my provisions, but the serpents, which began hissing round me,
put me into such extreme fear that I did not sleep. When day appeared
the serpents retired, and I came out of the cave trembling. I can justly
say that I walked upon diamonds without feeling any inclination to touch
them. At last I sat down, and notwithstanding my apprehensions, not
having closed my eyes during the night, fell asleep, after having eaten
a little more of my provisions. But I had scarcely shut my eyes when
something that fell by me with a great noise awaked me. This was a large
piece of raw meat; and at the same time I saw several others fall down
from the rocks in different places.
I had always regarded as fabulous what I had heard sailors and others
relate of the valley of diamonds, and of the stratagems employed by
merchants to obtain jewels from thence; but now I found that they had
stated nothing but the truth. For the fact is, that the merchants come
to the neighbourhood of this valley, when the eagles have young ones,
and throwing great joints of meat into the valley, the diamonds, upon
whose points they fall, stick to them; the eagles, which are stronger in
this country than anywhere else, pounce with great force upon those
pieces of meat, and carry them to their nests on the precipices of the
rocks to feed their young: the merchants at this time run to their
nests, disturb and drive off the eagles by their shouts, and take away
the diamonds that stick to the meat.
I perceived in this device the means of my deliverance.
Having collected together the largest diamonds I could find, I put them
into the leather bag in which I used to carry my provisions, I took the
largest of the pieces of meat, tied it close round me with the cloth of
my turban, and then laid myself upon the ground, with my face downward,
the bag of diamonds being made fast to my girdle.
I had scarcely placed myself in this posture when one of the eagles,
having taken me up with the piece of meat to which I was fastened,
carried me to his nest on the top of the mountain. The merchants
immediately began their shouting to frighten the eagles; and when they
had obliged them to quit their prey, one of them came to the nest where
I was. He was much alarmed when he saw me; but recovering himself,
instead of inquiring how I came thither, began to quarrel with me, and
asked why I stole his goods? "You will treat me," replied I, "with more
civility, when you know me better. Do not be uneasy; I have diamonds
enough for you and myself, more than all the other merchants together.
Whatever they have they owe to chance; but I selected for myself, in the
bottom of the valley, those which you see in this bag," I had scarcely
done speaking, when the other merchants came crowding about us, much
astonished to see me; but they were much more surprised when I told them
my story.
They conducted me to their encampment; and there having opened my bag,
they were surprised at the largeness of my diamonds, and confessed that
they had never seen any of such size and perfection. I prayed the
merchant who owned the nest to which I had been carried (for every
merchant had his own) to take as many for his share as he pleased. He
contented himself with one, and that, too, the least of them; and when I
pressed him to take more, without fear of doing me any injury, "No,"
said he, "I am very well satisfied with this, which is valuable enough
to save me the trouble of making any more voyages, and will raise as
great a fortune as I desire."
I spent the night with the merchants, to whom I related my story a
second time, for the satisfaction of those who had not heard it, I could
not moderate my joy when I found myself delivered from the danger I have
mentioned. I thought myself in a dream, and could scarcely believe
myself out of danger.
The merchants had thrown their pieces of meat into the valley for
several days; and each of them being satisfied with the diamonds that
had fallen to his lot, we left the place the next morning, and travelled
near high mountains, where there were serpents of a prodigious length,
which we had the good fortune to escape. We took shipping at the first
port we reached, and touched at the isle of Roha, where the trees grow
that yield camphire. This tree is so large, and its branches so thick,
that one hundred men may easily sit under its shade. The juice, of which
the camphire is made, exudes from a hole bored in the upper part of the
tree, and is received in a vessel, where it thickens to a consistency,
and becomes what we call camphire. After the juice is thus drawn out,
the tree withers and dies.
In this island is also found the rhinoceros, an animal less than the
elephant, but larger than the buffalo. It has a horn upon its nose,
about a cubit in length; this horn is solid, and cleft through the
middle. The rhinoceros fights with the elephant, runs his horn into his
belly, and carries him off upon his head; but the blood and the fat of
the elephant running into his eyes and making him blind, he falls to the
ground; and then, strange to relate, the roc comes and carries them both
away in her claws, for food for her young ones.
I pass over many other things peculiar to this island, lest I should
weary you. Here I exchanged some of my diamonds for merchandise. From
hence we went to other islands, and at last, having touched at several
trading towns of the continent, we landed at Bussorah, from whence I
proceeded to Bagdad. There I immediately gave large presents to the
poor, and lived honourably upon the vast riches I had brought, and
gained with so much fatigue.
Thus Sindbad ended the relation of the second voyage, gave Hindbad
another hundred sequins, and invited him to come the next day to hear
the account of the third.
THE WHITE CAT
There was once a king who had three sons, all remarkably handsome in
their persons, and in their tempers brave and noble. Some wicked
courtiers made the king believe that the princes were impatient to wear
the crown, and that they were contriving a plot to deprive him of his
sceptre and his kingdom. The king felt he was growing old; but as he
found himself as capable of governing as he had ever been, he had no
inclination to resign his power; and therefore, that he might pass the
rest of his days peaceably, he determined to employ the princes in such
a manner, as at once to give each of them the hope of succeeding to the
crown, and fill up the time they might otherwise spend in so undutiful a
manner. He sent for them to his cabinet, and after conversing with them
kindly, he added: "You must be sensible, my dear children, that my great
age prevents me from attending so closely as I have hitherto done to
state affairs. I fear this may be injurious to my subjects; I therefore
desire to place my crown on the head of one of you, but it is no more
than just, that in return for such a present, you should procure me some
amusement in my retirement, before I leave the Capital for ever. I
cannot help thinking, that a little dog, that is handsome, faithful, and
engaging, would be the very thing to make me happy; so that without
bestowing a preference on either of you, I declare that he who brings me
the most perfect little dog shall be my successor." The princes were
much surprised at the fancy of their father to have a little dog, yet
they accepted the proposition with pleasure: and accordingly, after
taking leave of the king, who presented them with abundance of money and
jewels, and appointed that day twelvemonth for their return, they set
off on their travels.
Before taking leave of each other, however, they took some refreshment
together, in an old palace about three miles out of town where they
agreed to meet in the same place on that day twelvemonth, and go all
together with their presents to court. They also agreed to change their
names, that they might be unknown to every one in their travels.
Each took a different road; but it is intended to relate the adventures
of only the youngest, who was the handsomest, most amiable, and
accomplished prince that had ever been seen. No day passed, as he
travelled from town to town, that he did not buy all the handsome dogs
that fell in his way; and as soon as he saw one that was handsomer than
those he had before, he made a present of the last; for twenty servants
would have been scarcely sufficient to take care of all the dogs he was
continually buying.
At length, wandering he knew not whither, he found himself in a forest;
night suddenly came on, and with it a violent storm of thunder,
lightning, and rain. To add to his perplexity, he lost his path, and
could find no way out of the forest. After he had groped about for a
long time, he perceived a light, which made him suppose that he was not
far from some house: he accordingly pursued his way towards it, and in a
short time found himself at the gates of the most magnificent palace he
ever beheld. The door that opened into it was made of gold, covered with
sapphire stones, which cast so resplendent a brightness over everything
around, that scarcely could the strongest eyesight bear to look at it.
This was the light the prince had seen from the forest. The walls of the
building were of transparent porcelain, variously coloured, and
represented the history of all the fairies that had existed from the
beginning of the world. The prince coming back to the golden door,
observed a deer's foot fastened to a chain of diamonds; he could not
help wondering at the magnificence he beheld, and the security in which
the inhabitants seemed to live; "for," said he to himself, "nothing can
be easier than for thieves to steal this chain, and as many of the
sapphire stones as would make their fortunes." He pulled the chain, and
heard a bell the sound of which was exquisite. In a few moments the door
was opened; but he perceived nothing but twelve hands in the air, each
holding a torch. The prince was so astonished that he durst not move a
step; when he felt himself gently pushed on by some other hands from
behind him. He walked on, in great perplexity, till he entered a
vestibule inlaid with porphyry and lapis-stone. There the most melodious
voice he had ever heard chanted the following words:
    "Welcome, prince, no danger fear,
     Mirth and love attend you here;
     You shall break the magic spell,
     That on a beauteous lady fell.
     Mirth and love attend you here,"
The prince now advanced with confidence, wondering what these words
could mean; the hands moved him forward towards a large door of coral,
which opened of itself to give him admittance into a splendid apartment
built of mother-of-pearl, through which he passed into others so richly
adorned with paintings and jewels, and so resplendently lighted with
thousands of lamps, girandoles and lustres, that the prince imagined he
must be in an enchanted palace. When he had passed through sixty
apartments, all equally splendid, he was stopped by the hands, and a
large easy-chair advanced of itself towards the chimney; and the hands,
which he observed were extremely white and delicate, took off his wet
clothes, and supplied their place with the finest linen imaginable, and
then added a commodious wrapping-gown, embroidered with the brightest
gold, and all over enriched with pearls. The hands next brought him an
elegant dressing-table, and combed his hair so very gently that he
scarcely felt their touch. They held before him a beautiful basin,
filled with perfumes, for him to wash his face and hands, and afterwards
took off the wrapping-gown and dressed him in a suit of clothes of still
greater splendour. When his dress was complete, they conducted him to an
apartment he had not yet seen, and which also was magnificently
furnished. There was in it a table spread for a repast, and everything
upon it was of the purest gold adorned with jewels. The prince observed
there were two covers set, and was wondering who was to be his
companion, when his attention was suddenly caught by a small figure not
a foot high, which just then entered the room, and advanced towards him.
It had on a long black veil, and was supported by two cats dressed in
mourning, and with swords by their sides: they were followed by a
numerous retinue of cats, some carrying cages full of rats and others
mousetraps full of mice.
The prince was at a loss what to think. The little figure now
approached, and throwing aside her veil, he beheld a most beautiful
white cat. She seemed young and melancholy, and addressing herself to
the prince, she said, "Young prince, you are welcome; your presence
affords me the greatest pleasure." "Madam," replied the prince, "I would
fain thank you for your generosity, nor can I help observing that you
must be an extraordinary creature to possess with your present form the
gift of speech and the magnificent palace I have seen." "All this is
very true," answered the beautiful cat, "but, prince, I am not fond of
talking, and least of all do I like compliments; let us therefore sit
down to supper." The trunkless hands then placed the dishes on the
table, and the prince and white cat seated themselves. The first dish
was a pie made of young pigeons, and the next was a fricassee of the
fattest mice. The view of the one made the prince almost afraid to taste
the other till the white cat, who guessed his thoughts, assured him that
there were certain dishes at table in which there was not a morsel of
either rat or mouse, which had been dressed on purpose for him.
Accordingly he ate heartily of such as she recommended. When supper was
over, the prince perceived that the white cat had a portrait set in gold
hanging to one of her feet. He begged her permission to look at it;
when, to his astonishment, he saw the portrait of a handsome young man,
that exactly resembled himself! He thought there was something very
extraordinary in all this: yet, as the white cat sighed and looked very
sorrowful, he did not venture to ask any questions. He conversed with
her on different subjects, and found her extremely well versed in every
thing that was passing in the world. When night was far advanced, the
white cat wished him a good night, and he was conducted by the hands to
his bedchamber, which was different still from any thing he had seen in
the palace, being hung with the wings of butterflies, mixed with the
most curious feathers. His bed was of gauze, festooned with bunches of
the gayest ribands, and the looking-glasses reached from the floor to
the ceiling. The prince was undressed and put into bed by the hands,
without speaking a word. He however slept little, and in the morning was
awaked by a confused noise. The hands took him out of bed, and put on
him a handsome hunting-jacket. He looked into the court-yard, and
perceived more than five hundred cats, busily employed in preparing for
the field, for this was a day of festival. Presently the white cat came
to his apartment; and having politely inquired after his health, she
invited him to partake of their amusement. The prince willingly
accepted, mounted a wooden horse, richly caparisoned, which had been
prepared for him, and which he was assured would gallop to admiration.
The beautiful white cat mounted a monkey, dressed in a dragoon's bonnet,
which made her look so fierce that all the rats and mice ran away in the
utmost terror.
Every thing being ready, the horns sounded, and away they went; no
hunting was ever more agreeable; the cats ran faster than the hares and
rabbits; and when they caught any they were hunted in the presence of
the white cat, and a thousand cunning tricks were played. Nor were the
birds in safety; for the monkey made nothing of climbing up the trees,
with the white cat on his back, to the nest of the young eagles. When
the hunting was over, the whole retinue returned to the palace; and the
white cat immediately exchanged her dragoon's cap for the veil, and sat
down to supper with the prince, who, being very hungry, ate heartily,
and afterwards partook with her of the most delicious liqueurs, which
being often repeated made him forget that he was to procure a little dog
for the old king. He thought no longer of any thing but of pleasing the
sweet little creature who received him so courteously; accordingly every
day was spent in new amusements. The prince had almost forgotten his
country and relations, and sometimes even regretted that he was not a
cat, so great was his affection for his mewing companions. "Alas!" said
he to the white cat, "how will it afflict me to leave you whom I love so
much! Either make yourself a lady, or make me a cat." She smiled at the
prince's wish, but made him scarcely any reply. At length the
twelvemonth was nearly expired; the white cat, who knew the very day
when the prince was to reach his father's palace, reminded him that he
had but three days longer to look for a perfect little dog. The prince,
astonished at his own forgetfulness, began to afflict himself; when the
cat told him not to be so sorrowful, since she would not only provide
him with a little dog, but also with a wooden horse which should convey
him safely in less than twelve hours. "Look here," said she, showing him
an acorn, "this contains what you desire." The prince put the acorn to
his ear, and heard the barking of a little dog. Transported with joy, he
thanked the cat a thousand times, and the next day, bidding her tenderly
adieu, he set out on his return.
The prince arrived first at the place of rendezvous, and was soon joined
by his brothers; they mutually embraced, and began to give an account of
their success; when the youngest showed them only a little mongrel cur,
telling them he thought it could not fail to please the king from its
extraordinary beauty, the brothers trod on each other's toes under the
table; as much as to say, we have not much to fear from this sorry
looking animal. The next day they went together to the palace. The dogs
of the two elder princes were lying on cushions, and so curiously
wrapped around with embroidered quilts, that one would scarcely venture
to touch them. The youngest produced his cur, dirty all over, and all
wondered how the prince could hope to receive a crown for such a
present. The king examined the two little dogs of the elder princes, and
declared he thought them so equally beautiful that he knew not to which,
with justice, he could give the preference. They accordingly began to
dispute; when the youngest prince, taking his acorn from his pocket,
soon ended their contention; for a little dog appeared which could with
ease go through the smallest ring, and was besides a miracle of beauty.
The king could not possibly hesitate in declaring his satisfaction; yet,
as he was not more inclined than the year before to part with his crown,
he could think of nothing more to his purpose than telling his sons that
he was extremely obliged to them for the pains they had taken; and that
since they had succeeded so well, he could not but wish they would make
a second attempt; he therefore begged they would take another year for
procuring him a piece of cambric, so fine as to be drawn through the eye
of a small needle.
The three princes thought this very hard; yet they set out in obedience
to the king's command. The two eldest took different roads, and the
youngest remounted his wooden horse, and in a short time arrived at the
palace of his beloved white cat, who received him with the greatest joy,
while the trunkless hands helped him to dismount, and provided him with
immediate refreshments; after which the prince gave the white cat an
account of the admiration which had been bestowed on the beautiful
little dog, and informed her of his father's farther injunction. "Make
yourself perfectly easy, dear prince," said she, "I have in my palace
some cats that are perfectly clever in making such cambric as the king
requires; so you have nothing to do but to give me the pleasure of your
company while it is making; and I will procure you all the amusement
possible." She accordingly ordered the most curious fireworks to be
played off in sight of the window of the apartment in which they were
sitting; and nothing but festivity and rejoicing was heard throughout
the palace for the prince's return. As the white cat continually gave
proofs of an excellent understanding, the prince was by no means tired
of her company; she talked with him of state affairs, of theatres, of
fashions; in short, she was at a loss on no subject whatever; so that
when the prince was alone, he had plenty of amusement in thinking how it
could possibly be that a small white cat could be endowed with all the
powers of human creatures.
The twelvemonth in this manner again passed insensibly away; but the cat
took care to remind the prince of his duty in proper time. "For once, my
prince," said she, "I will have the pleasure of equipping you as suits
your high rank;" when looking into the court-yard, he saw a superb car,
ornamented all over with gold, silver, pearls and diamonds, drawn by
twelve horses as white as snow, and harnessed in the most sumptuous
trappings; and behind the car a thousand guards richly apparelled were
in waiting to attend on the prince's person. She then presented him with
a nut: "You will find in it," said she, "the piece of cambric I promised
you. Do not break the shell till you are in the presence of the king
your father." Then, to prevent the acknowledgments which the prince was
about to offer, she hastily bade him adieu. Nothing could exceed the
speed with which the snow-white horses conveyed this fortunate prince to
his father's palace, where his brothers had just arrived before him.
They embraced each other, and demanded an immediate audience of the
king, who received them with the greatest kindness. The princes hastened
to place at the feet of his majesty the curious present he had required
them to procure. The eldest produced a piece of cambric that was so
extremely fine, that his friends had no doubt of its passing the eye of
the needle, which was now delivered to the king, having been kept locked
up in the custody of his majesty's treasurer all the time, Every one
supposed he would certainly obtain the crown. But when the king tried to
draw it through the eye of the needle, it would not pass, though it
failed but very little. Then came the second prince, who made as sure of
obtaining the crown as his brother had done; but, alas! with no better
success: for though his piece of cambric was exquisitely fine, yet it
could not be drawn through the eye of the needle. It was now the
youngest prince's turn, who accordingly advanced, and opening an elegant
little box inlaid with jewels, he took out a walnut, and cracked the
shell, imagining he should immediately perceive his piece of cambric;
but what was his astonishment to see nothing but a filbert! He did not
however lose his hopes; he cracked the filbert, and it presented him
with a cherry-stone. The lords of the court, who had assembled to
witness this extraordinary trial, could not, any more than the princes
his brothers, refrain from laughing, to think he should be so silly as
to claim with them the crown on no better pretensions. The prince
however cracked the cherry-stone, which was filled with a kernel: he
divided it, and found in the middle a grain of wheat, and in that grain
a millet seed. He was now absolutely confounded, and could not help
muttering between his teeth: "O white cat, white cat, thou hast deceived
me!" At this instant he felt his hand scratched by the claw of a cat:
upon which he again took courage, and opening the grain of millet seed,
to the astonishment of all present, he drew forth a piece of cambric
four hundred yards long, and fine enough to be drawn with perfect ease
through the eye of the needle. When the king found he had no pretext
left for refusing the crown to his youngest son, he sighed deeply, and
it was easy to be seen that he was sorry for the prince's success. "My
sons," said he, "it is so gratifying to the heart of a father to receive
proofs of his children's love and obedience, that I cannot refuse myself
the satisfaction of requiring of you one thing more. You must undertake
another expedition; and whichever, by the end of a year, brings me the
most beautiful lady, shall marry her, and obtain my crown."
So they again took leave of the king and of each other, and set out
without delay, and in less than twelve hours our young prince arrived in
his splendid car at the palace of his dear white cat. Every thing went
on as before, till the end of another year. At length only one day
remained of the year, when the white cat thus addressed him: "To-morrow,
my prince, you must present yourself at the palace of your father, and
give him a proof of your obedience. It depends only on yourself to
conduct thither the most beautiful princess ever yet beheld, for the
time is come when the enchantment by which I am bound may be ended. You
must cut off my head and tail," continued she, "and throw them into the
fire." "I!" said the prince hastily, "I cut off your head and tail! You
surely mean to try my affection, which, believe me, beautiful cat, is
truly yours." "You mistake me, generous prince," said she, "I do not
doubt your regard; but if you wish to see me in any other form than that
of a cat, you must consent to do as I desire. Then you will have done me
a service I shall never be able sufficiently to repay." The prince's
eyes filled with tears as she spoke, yet he considered himself obliged
to undertake the dreadful task, and the cat continuing to press him with
greater eagerness, with a trembling hand he drew his sword, cut off her
head and tail, and threw them into the fire. No sooner was this done,
than the most beautiful lady his eyes had ever seen stood before him:
and before he had sufficiently recovered from his surprise to speak to
her, a long train of attendants, who, at the same moment as their
mistress, were changed to their natural shapes, came to offer their
congratulations to the queen, and inquire her commands. She received
them with the greatest kindness; and ordering them to withdraw, she thus
addressed the astonished prince. "Do not imagine, dear prince, that I
have always been a cat, or that I am of obscure birth. My father was the
monarch of six kingdoms; he tenderly loved my mother, leaving her always
at liberty to follow her own inclinations. Her prevailing passion was to
travel; and a short time before my birth, having heard of some fairies
who were in possession of the largest gardens filled with the most
delicious fruits, she had so strong a desire to eat some of them, that
she set out for the country in which they lived. She arrived at their
abode which she found to be a magnificent palace, on all sides
glittering with gold and precious stones. She knocked a long time at the
gates; but no one came, nor could she perceive the least sign that it
had any inhabitant. The difficulty, however, did but increase the
violence of my mother's longing; for she saw the tops of the trees above
the garden walls loaded with the most luscious fruits. The queen, in
despair, ordered her attendants to place tents close to the door of the
palace; but having waited six weeks, without seeing any one pass the
gates, she fell sick of vexation, and her life was despaired of.
"One night, as she lay half asleep, she turned herself about, and
opening her eyes, perceived a little old woman, very ugly and deformed,
seated in the easy chair by her bedside. 'I, and my sister fairies,'
said she, 'take it very ill that your majesty should so obstinately
persist in getting some of our fruit; but since so precious a life is at
stake, we consent to give you as much as you can carry away, provided
you will give us in return what we shall ask.' 'Ah! kind fairy,' cried
the queen, 'I will give you anything I possess, even my very kingdoms,
on condition that I eat of your fruit.' The old fairy then informed the
queen that what they required was, that she would give them the child
she was going to have, as soon as she should be born; adding, that every
possible care should be taken of her, and that she should become the
most accomplished princess. The queen replied, that however cruel the
condition, she must accept it, since nothing but the fruit could save
her life. In short, dear prince," continued the lady, "my mother
instantly got out of bed, was dressed by her attendants, entered the
palace, and satisfied her longing. When the queen had eaten her fill,
she ordered four thousand mules to be procured, and loaded with the
fruit, which had the virtue of continuing all the year round in a state
of perfection. Thus provided, she returned to the king, my father, who
with the whole court, received her with rejoicings, as it was before
imagined she would die of disappointment. All this time the queen said
nothing to my father of the promise she had made, to give her daughter
to the fairies; so that, when the time was come that she expected my
birth, she grew very melancholy; till at length, being pressed by the
king, she declared to him the truth. Nothing could exceed his
affliction, when he heard that his only child, when born, was to be
given to the fairies. He bore it, however, as well as he could, for fear
of adding to my mother's grief; and also believing he should find some
means of keeping me in a place of safety, which the fairies would not be
able to approach. As soon therefore as I was born, he had me conveyed to
a tower in the palace, to which there were twenty flights of stairs, and
a door to each, of which my father kept the key, so that none came near
me without his consent. When the fairies heard of what had been done,
they sent first to demand me; and on my father's refusal, they let loose
a monstrous dragon, who devoured men, women and children, and the breath
of whose nostrils destroyed every thing it came near, so that the trees
and plants began to die in great abundance. The grief of the king, at
seeing this, could scarcely be equalled; and finding that his whole
kingdom would in a short time be reduced to famine, he consented to give
me into their hands. I was accordingly laid in a cradle of
mother-of-pearl, ornamented with gold and jewels, and carried to their
palace, when the dragon immediately disappeared. The fairies placed me
in a tower of their palace, elegantly furnished, but to which there was
no door, so that whoever approached was obliged to come by the windows,
which were a great height from the ground: from these I had the liberty
of getting out into a delightful garden, in which were baths, and every
sort of cooling fruit. In this place was I educated by the fairies, who
behaved to me with the greatest kindness; my clothes were splendid, and
I was instructed in every kind of accomplishment. In short, prince, if I
had never seen any one but themselves, I should have remained very
happy. One of the windows of my tower overlooked a long avenue shaded
with trees, so that I had never seen in it a human creature. One day,
however, as I was talking at this window with my parrot, I perceived a
young gentleman who was listening to our conversation. As I had never
seen a man, but in pictures, I was not sorry for the opportunity of
gratifying my curiosity. I thought him a very pleasing object, and he at
length bowed in the most respectful manner, without daring to speak, for
he knew that I was in the palace of the fairies. When it began to grow
dark he went away, and I vainly endeavoured to see which road he took.
The next morning, as soon as it was light, I again placed myself at the
window, and had the pleasure of seeing that the gentleman had returned
to the same place. He now spoke to me through a speaking-trumpet, and
informed me he thought me a most charming lady, and that he should be
very unhappy if he did not pass his life in my company.
"I resolved to find some means of escaping from my tower with the
engaging prince I had seen. I was not long in devising a means for the
execution of my project. I begged the fairies to bring me a
netting-needle, a mesh and some cord, saying I wished to make some nets
to amuse myself with catching birds at my window. This they readily
complied with, and in a short time I completed a ladder long enough to
reach the ground. I now sent my parrot to the prince, to beg he would
come to his usual place, as I wished to speak with him. He did not fail,
and finding the ladder, mounted it, and quickly entered my tower. This
at first alarmed me; but the charms of his conversation had restored me
to tranquillity, when all at once the window opened, and the fairy
Violent, mounted on the dragon's back, rushed into the tower. My beloved
prince thought of nothing but how to defend me from their fury; for I
had had time to relate to him my story, previous to this cruel
interruption; but their numbers overpowered him, and the fairy Violent
had the barbarity to command the dragon to devour my prince before my
eyes. In my despair, I would have thrown myself also into the mouth of
the horrible monster, but this they took care to prevent, saying my life
should be preserved for greater punishment. The fairy then touched me
with her wand, and I instantly became a white cat. She next conducted me
to this palace, which belonged to my father, and gave me a train of cats
for my attendants, together with the twelve hands which waited on your
highness. She then informed me of my birth, and the death of my parents,
and pronounced upon me what she imagined the greatest of maledictions:
That I should not be restored to my natural figure till a young prince,
the perfect resemblance of him I had lost, should cut off my head and
tail. You are that perfect resemblance; and, accordingly, you have ended
the enchantment. I need not add, that I already love you more than my
life. Let us therefore hasten to the palace of the king your father, and
obtain his approbation to our marriage."
The prince and princess accordingly set out side by side, in a car of
still greater splendour than before, and reached the palace just as the
two brothers had arrived with two beautiful princesses. The king,
hearing that each of his sons had succeeded in finding what he had
required, again began to think of some new expedient to delay the time
of his resigning his crown; but when the whole court were with the king
assembled to pass judgment, the princess who accompanied the youngest,
perceiving his thoughts by his countenance, stepped majestically
forward, and thus addressed him: "What pity that your majesty, who is so
capable of governing, should think of resigning the crown! I am
fortunate enough to have six kingdoms in my possession; permit me to
bestow one on each of the eldest princes, and to enjoy the remaining
four in the society of the youngest. And may it please your majesty to
keep your own kingdom, and make no decision concerning the beauty of
three princesses, who, without such a proof of your majesty's
preference, will no doubt live happily together!" The air resounded with
the applauses of the assembly. The young prince and princess embraced
the king, and next their brothers and sisters; the three weddings
immediately took place; and the kingdoms were divided as the princess
had proposed.
THE GOLDEN GOOSE
There was a man who had three sons, the youngest of whom was considered
very silly, and everybody used to mock him and make fun of him. The
eldest son wanted to go and cut wood in the forest, and before he left
home his mother prepared beautiful pancakes and a bottle of wine for him
to take with him, so that he might not suffer from hunger or thirst.
As he entered the forest he met a gray old man, who bade him
"Good-morning," and said: "Give me a little piece of cake out of your
basket and a drop of wine out of your bottle, for I am very hungry and
thirsty."
But the clever son replied: "What, give you my cake and my wine! Why, if
I did, I should have none for myself. Not I, indeed, so take yourself
off!" and he left the man standing and went on.
The young man began cutting down a tree, but it was not long before he
made a false stroke: the axe slipped and cut his arm so badly that he
was obliged to go home and have it bound up. Now, this false stroke was
caused by the little gray old man.
Next day the second son went into the forest to cut wood, and his mother
gave him a cake and a bottle of wine. As he entered the wood the same
little old man met him, and begged for a piece of cake and a drop of
wine. But the second son answered rudely: "What I might give to you I
shall want myself, so be off."
Then he left the little old man standing in the road, and walked on. His
punishment soon came; he had scarcely given two strokes on a tree with
his axe, when he hit his leg such a terrible blow that he was obliged to
limp home in great pain.
Then the stupid son said to his father, "Let me go for once and cut wood
in the forest."
But his father said: "No, your brothers have been hurt already, and it
would be worse for you, who don't understand wood-cutting."
The boy, however, begged so hard to be allowed to go that his father
said: "There, get along with you; you will buy your experience very
dearly, I expect."
His mother, however, gave him a cake which had been made with water and
baked in the ashes, and a bottle of sour beer.
When he reached the wood the very same little old man met him, and after
greeting him kindly, said: "Give me a little of your cake and a drop
from your bottle, for I am very hungry and thirsty."
"Oh," replied the simple youth, "I have only a cake, which has been
baked in the ashes, and some sour beer; but you are welcome to a share
of it. Let us sit down, and eat and drink together."
So they seated themselves, and, lo and behold, when the youth opened his
basket, the cake had been turned into a beautiful cake, and the sour
beer into wine. After they had eaten and drank enough, the little old
man said: "Because you have been kind-hearted, and shared your dinner
with me, I will make you in future lucky in all you undertake. There
stands an old tree; cut it down, and you will find something good at the
root."
Then the old man said "Farewell," and left him.
The youth set to work, and very soon succeeded in felling the tree, when
he found sitting at the roots a goose, whose feathers were of pure gold.
He took it up, and, instead of going home, carried it with him to an inn
at a little distance, where he intended to pass the night.
The landlord had three daughters, who looked at the goose with envious
eyes. They had never seen such a wonderful bird, and longed to have at
least one of its feathers. "Ah," thought the eldest, "I shall soon have
an opportunity to pluck one of them;" and so it happened, for not long
after the young man left the room. She instantly went up to the bird and
took hold of its wing, but as she did so, the finger and thumb remained
and stuck fast. In a short time after the second sister came in with the
full expectation of gaining a golden feather, but as she touched her
sister to move her from the bird, her hand stuck fast to her sister's
dress, and neither of them could free herself. At last, in came the
third sister with the same intention. "Keep away, keep away!" screamed
the other two; "in heaven's name keep away!"
But she could not imagine why she should keep away. If they were near
the golden bird, why should not she be there? So she made a spring
forward and touched her second sister, and immediately she also was made
a prisoner, and in this position they were obliged to remain by the
goose all night.
In the morning the young man came in, took the goose on his arm, and
went away without troubling himself about the three girls, who were
following close behind him. And as he walked quickly, they were obliged
to run one behind the other, left or right of him, just as he was
inclined to go.
In the middle of a field they were met by the parson of the parish, who
looked with wonder at the procession as it came near him. "Shame on
you!" he cried out. "What are you about, you bold-faced hussies, running
after a young man in that way through the fields? Go home, all of you."
He placed his hand on the youngest to pull her back, but the moment he
touched her he also became fixed, and was obliged to follow and run like
the rest. In a few minutes the clerk met them, and when he saw the
parson runing after the girls, he wondered greatly, and cried out,
"Halloa, master parson, where are you running in such haste? Have you
forgotten that there is a christening to-day?" And as the procession did
not stop, he ran after it, and seized the parson's gown.
In a moment he found that his hand was fixed, and he also had to run
like the rest. And now there were five trotting along, one behind the
other. Presently two peasants came by with their sickles from the field.
The parson called out to them, and begged them to come and release him
and the clerk. Hardly had they touched the clerk when they also stuck
fast as the others, and the simpleton with his golden goose travelled
with the seven.
After awhile they came to a city in which reigned a king who had a
daughter of such a melancholy disposition that no one could make her
laugh; therefore he issued a decree that whoever would make the princess
laugh should have her in marriage.
Now, when the simple youth heard this, he ran before her, and the whole
seven trotted after him. The sight was so ridiculous that the moment the
princess saw it she burst into a violent fit of laughter and they
thought she would never leave off.
After this, the youth went to the king, and demanded his daughter in
marriage, according to the king's decree; but his majesty did not quite
like to have the young man for a son-in-law, so he said that, before he
could consent to the marriage, the youth must bring him a man who could
drink all the wine in the king's cellar.
The simpleton went into the forest, for he thought, "If anyone can help
me, it is the little gray man." When he arrived at the spot where he had
cut down the tree, there stood a man with a very miserable face.
The youth asked him why he looked so sorrowful.
"Oh," he exclaimed, "I suffer such dreadful thirst that nothing seems
able to quench it; and cold water I cannot endure. I have emptied a cask
of wine already, but it was just like a drop of water on a hot stone."
"I can help you," cried the young man; "come with me, and you shall have
your fill, I promise you."
Upon this he led the man into the king's cellar, where he opened the
casks one after another, and drank and drank till his back ached; and
before the day closed he had quite emptied the king's cellar.
Again the young man asked for his bride, but the king was annoyed at the
thought of giving his daughter to such a common fellow, and to get rid
of him he made another condition. He said that no man should have his
daughter who could not find someone able to eat up a whole mountain of
bread.
Away went the simpleton to the forest as before, and there in the same
place sat a man binding himself round tightly with a belt, and making
the most horrible faces. As the youth approached, he cried, "I have
eaten a whole ovenful of rolls, but it has not satisfied me a bit; I am
as hungry as ever, and my stomach feels so empty that I am obliged to
bind it round tightly, or I should die of hunger."
The simpleton could hardly contain himself for joy when he heard this.
"Get up," he exclaimed, "and come with me, and I will give you plenty to
eat, I'll warrant."
So he led him to the king's court, where his majesty had ordered all the
flour in the kingdom to be made into bread, and piled up in a huge
mountain. The hungry man placed himself before the bread, and began to
eat, and before evening the whole pile had disappeared.
Then the simpleton went a third time to the king, and asked for his
bride, but the king made several excuses, and at last said that if he
could bring him a ship that would travel as well by land as by water,
then he should, without any further conditions, marry his daughter.
The youth went at once straight to the forest, and saw the same old gray
man to whom he had given his cake. "Ah," he said, as the youth
approached, "it was I who sent the men to eat and drink, and I will also
give you a ship that can travel by land or by sea, because when you
thought I was poor you were kind-hearted, and gave me food and drink."
The youth took the ship, and when the king saw it he was quite
surprised; but he could not any longer refuse to give him his daughter
in marriage. The wedding was celebrated with great pomp, and after the
king's death the simple wood-cutter inherited the whole kingdom, and
lived happily with his wife.
THE TWELVE BROTHERS
There were once a king and queen who had twelve children--all boys. Now,
one day the king told his wife that if a daughter should be born, all
the sons must die--that their sister alone might inherit his kingdom and
riches.
So the king had twelve coffins made, which were filled with shavings,
and in each was the little pillow for the dead. He had them locked up in
a private room, the key of which he gave to the queen, praying her not
to speak of it to anyone. But the poor mother was so unhappy that she
wept for a whole day, and looked so sad that her youngest son noticed
it.
He had the Bible name of Benjamin, and was always with his mother.
"Dear mother," he said, "why are you so sorrowful?"
"My child, I may not tell you," she replied; but the boy allowed her no
rest till she unlocked the door of the private room, and showed him the
twelve coffins filled with shavings.
"Dearest Benjamin," she said, "these coffins are for you and your
brothers; for if you should ever have a little sister, you will all die,
and be buried in them."
She wept bitterly as she told him, but her son comforted her, and said,
"Do not weep, dear mother. We will take care of ourselves, and go far
away."
Then she took courage, and said, "Yes, go away with your eleven
brothers, and remain in the forest; and let one climb a tree, from
whence he will be able to see the tower of the castle; If I should have
a son, a white flag shall be hoisted, and then you may return home; but
if you see a red flag, you will know it is a girl, and then hasten away
as fast as you can, and may Heaven protect you! Every night I will pray
for you, that you may not suffer from the cold in winter or the heat in
summer."
Then she blessed all her sons, and they went away into the forest, while
each in turn mounted a high tree daily, to watch for the flag on the
tower.
Eleven days passed, and it was Benjamin's turn to watch. He saw the flag
hoisted, and it was red--the signal that they must die. The brothers
were angry, and said, "Shall we suffer death on account of a maiden?
When we find one we will kill her, to avenge ourselves."
They went still farther into the forest, and came upon a most pleasant
little cottage, which was uninhabited. "We will make this our home,"
they said; "and Benjamin, as you are the youngest and weakest, you shall
stay at home and keep house, while we go out and procure food."
So they wandered about the forest, shooting hares, wild rabbits, pigeons
and other birds, which they brought to Benjamin to prepare for food. In
this cottage they lived for ten years happily together, so that the time
passed quickly.
Their little sister was growing a great girl. She had a sweet
disposition, and was very beautiful to look upon. She wore rich clothes,
and a golden star on her forehead.
One day, when she was about ten years old, she discovered in her
mother's wardrobe twelve shirts. "Mother," she exclaimed, "whose shirts
are these? They are much too small for my father."
The queen sighed as she replied, "Dear child, these shirts belong to
your twelve brothers."
"Twelve brothers!" cried the little maiden. "Where are they? I have not
even heard of them."
"Heaven knows where they are," was the reply; "but they are wandering
about the world somewhere." Then the queen took her little daughter to
the private room in the castle, and showed her the twelve coffins which
had been prepared for her brothers, and related to her, with many tears,
why they had left home.
"Dear mother," said the child, "do not weep. I will go and seek my
brothers." So she took the twelve shirts with her, and wandered away
into the forest.
She walked for a whole day, and in the evening came to a cottage,
stepped in, and found a young boy, who stared with astonishment at
seeing a beautiful little girl dressed in rich clothing and wearing a
golden star on her forehead.
At last he said, "Who are you, and what do you want?"
"I am a king's daughter," she said, "and I seek my twelve brothers, and
I intend to search for them till I find them;" and she showed him their
shirts.
Then Benjamin knew that she was his sister, and said, "I am your
youngest brother, Benjamin." Then she wept for joy. They kissed each
other with deep affection, and were for a time very happy.
At last Benjamin said, "Dear sister, we have made a vow that the first
young maiden we meet should die, because through a maiden we have lost
our kingly rights."
"I would willingly die," she said, "if by so doing I could restore my
brothers to their rightful possessions."
"No, you shall not die," he replied. "Hide yourself behind this tub
until our eleven brothers come home; then I will make an agreement with
them."
At night the brothers returned from hunting, and the supper was ready.
While they sat at table, one of them said, "Well, Benjamin, have you any
news?"
"Perhaps I have," he said, "although it seems strange that I, who stay
at home, should know more than you, who have been out."
"Well, tell us your news," said one. So he said:
"I will tell you if you will make one promise."
"Yes, yes!" they all cried. "What is it?"
"Well, then, promise me that the first maiden you meet with in the
forest shall not die."
"Yes, yes!" said they all; "she shall have mercy, but tell us."
"Then," said the youngest brother, "our sister is here;" and, rising, he
lifted the tub, and the king's daughter came forth in her royal robes
and with a golden star on her forehead, and looking so fair and delicate
and beautiful that the brothers were full of joy, and kissed and
embraced her with the fondest affection.
She stayed with Benjamin, and helped him in keeping the house clean and
cooking the game which the others brought home. Everything was so nicely
managed now and with so much order, the curtains and the quilts were
beautifully white, and the dinners cooked so well that the brothers were
always contented, and lived in great unity with their little sister.
There was a pretty garden around the house in which they lived, and one
day, when they were all at home dining together, and enjoying
themselves, the maiden went out into the garden to gather them some
flowers.
She had tended twelve lilies with great care, and they were now in such
splendid bloom that she determined to pluck them for her brothers, to
please them.
But the moment she gathered the lilies, her twelve brothers were changed
into twelve ravens, and flew away over the trees of the forest, while
the charming house and garden vanished from her sight. Now was the poor
little maiden left all alone in the wild wood, and knew not what to do;
but on turning round she saw a curious old woman standing near, who said
to her, "My child, what hast thou done? Why didst thou not leave those
white flowers to grow on their stems? They were thy twelve brothers, and
now they will always remain ravens."
"Is there no way to set them free?" asked the maiden, weeping.
"No way in the world," she replied, "but one, and that is far too
difficult for thee to perform; yet it would break the spell and set them
free. Hast thou firmness enough to remain dumb seven years, and not
speak to anyone, or even laugh? for if ever you utter a single word, or
fail only once in the seven years, all you have done before will be
vain, and at this one word your brothers will die."
"Yes," said the maiden, "I can do this to set my brothers free."
Then the maiden climbed into a tree, and, seating herself in the
branches, began to knit.
She remained here, living on the fruit that grew on the tree, and
without laughing or uttering a word.
As she sat in her tree, the king, who was hunting, had a favourite
hound, who very soon discovered her, ran to the tree on which the maiden
sat, sprang up to it, and barked at her violently.
The king came nearer, and saw the beautiful king's daughter with the
golden star on her forehead. He was so struck with her beauty that he
begged her to come down, and asked her to be his bride. She did not
speak a word, but merely nodded her head. Then the king himself climbed
up into the tree, and bringing her down, seated her on his own horse and
galloped away with her to his home.
The marriage was soon after celebrated with great pomp, but the bride
neither spoke nor laughed.
When they had lived happily together for some years, the king's mother,
a wicked woman, began to raise evil reports about the queen, and said to
the king, "It is some beggar girl you have picked up. Who can tell what
wicked tricks she practises. She can't help being dumb, but why does she
never laugh? unless she has a guilty conscience." The king at first
would listen to none of these suspicions, but she urged him so long, and
accused the queen of such wicked conduct, that at last he condemned her
to be burnt to death.
Now in the court-yard a great fire was kindled, and the king stood
weeping at a window overlooking the court of the palace, for he still
loved her dearly. He saw her brought forth and tied to the stake; the
fire kindled, and the flames with their forked tongues were creeping
towards her, when at the last moment the seven years were past, and
suddenly a rustling noise of wings was heard in the air; twelve black
ravens alighted on the earth and instantly assumed their own forms--they
were the brothers of the queen.
They tore down the pile and extinguished the fire, set their sister
free, and embraced her tenderly. The queen, who was now able to speak,
told the king why she had been dumb and had never laughed.
The delight of the king was only equalled by his anger against the
wicked witch, who was brought to justice and ordered to be thrown into a
vat of oil full of poisonous snakes, where she died a dreadful death.
THE FAIR ONE WITH THE GOLDEN LOCKS
There was once a most beautiful and amiable princess who was called "The
Fair One with Locks of Gold," for her hair shone brighter than gold, and
flowed in curls down to her feet, her head was always encircled by a
wreath of beautiful flowers, and pearls and diamonds.
A handsome, rich, young prince, whose territories joined to hers, was
deeply in love with the reports he heard of her, and sent to demand her
in marriage. The ambassador sent with proposals was most sumptuously
attired, and surrounded by lackeys on beautiful horses, as well as
charged with every kind of compliment, from the anxious prince, who
hoped he would bring the princess back with him; but whether it was that
she was not that day in a good humour, or that she did not like the
speeches made by the ambassador, I don't know, but she returned thanks
to his master for the honour he intended her, and said she had no
inclination to marry. When the ambassador arrived at the king's chief
city, where he was expected with great impatience, the people were
extremely afflicted to see him return without the Fair One with the
Locks of Gold; and the king wept like a child. There was a youth at
court whose beauty outshone the sun, the gracefulness of whose person
was not to be equalled, and for his gracefulness and wit, he was called
Avenant: the king loved him, and indeed every body except the envious.
Avenant being one day in company with some persons, inconsiderately
said, "If the king had sent me to the Fair One with Locks of Gold, I
dare say I could have prevailed on her to return with me." These enviers
of Avenant's prosperity immediately ran open mouthed to the king,
saying, "Sir sir, what does your majesty think Avenant says? He boasts
that if you had sent him to the Fair One with the Golden Hair, he could
have brought her with him; which shows he is so vain as to think himself
handsomer than your majesty and that her love for him would have made
her follow him wherever he went." This put the king into a violent rage.
"What!" said he, "does this youngster make a jest at my misfortune, and
pretend to set himself above me? Go and put him immediately in my great
tower, and there let him starve to death." The king's guards went and
seized Avenant who thought no more of what he had said, dragged him to
prison, and used him in the most cruel manner.
One day when he was almost quite spent, he said to himself, fetching a
deep sigh, "Wherein can I have offended the king? He has not a more
faithful subject than myself; nor have I ever done any thing to
displease him." The king happened at that time to pass by the tower; and
stopped to hear him, notwithstanding the persuasions of those that were
with him; "Hold your peace," replied the king, "and let me hear him
out." Which having done, and being greatly moved by his sufferings, he
opened the door of the tower, and called him by his name. Upon which
Avenant came forth in a sad condition, and, throwing himself at the
king's feet, "What have I done, sir," said he, "that your majesty should
use me thus severely?" "Thou hast ridiculed me and my ambassador,"
replied the king; "and hast said, that if I had sent thee to the Fair
One with Locks of Gold, thou couldst have brought her with thee." "It is
true, sir," replied Avenant, "for I would have so thoroughly convinced
her of your transcending qualities, that it should not have been in her
power to have denied me; and this, surely, I said in the name of your
majesty." The king found in reality he had done no injury; so, he took
him away with him, repenting heartily of the wrong he had done him.
After having given him an excellent supper, the king sent for him into
his cabinet. "Avenant," said he, "I still love the Fair One with Locks
of Gold; I have a mind to send thee to her, to try whether thou canst
succeed," Avenant replied, he was ready to obey his majesty in all
things, and would depart the very next morning. "Hold," said the king,
"I will provide thee first with a most sumptuous equipage." "There is no
necessity for that," answered Avenant; "I need only a good horse and
your letters of credence." Upon this the king embraced him; being
overjoyed to see him so soon ready.
It was upon a Monday morning that he took leave of the king and his
friends. Being on his journey by break of day, and entering into a
spacious meadow, a fine thought came into his head; he alighted
immediately, and seated himself by the bank of a little stream that
watered one side of the meadow, and wrote the sentiment down in his
pocket book. After he had done writing, he looked about him every way,
being charmed with the beauties of the place, and suddenly perceived a
large gilded carp, which stirred a little, and that was all it could do,
for having attempted to catch some little flies, it had leaped so far
out of the water, as to throw itself upon the grass, where it was almost
dead, not being able to recover its natural element. Avenant took pity
on the poor creature, and though it was a fish-day, and he might have
carried it away for his dinner, he took it up, and gently put it again
into the river, where the carp, feeling the refreshing coolness of the
water, began to rejoice, and sunk to the bottom; but soon rising up
again, brisk and gay, to the side of the river; "Avenant," said the
carp, "I thank you for the kindness you have done me; had it not been
for you, I had died; but you have saved my life, and I will reward you."
After this short compliment, the carp darted itself to the bottom of the
water, leaving Avenant not a little surprised at its wit and great
civility.
Another day, as he was pursuing his journey, he saw a crow in great
distress: being pursued by a huge eagle, he took his bow, which he
always carried abroad with him, and aiming at the eagle, let fly an
arrow, which pierced him through the body, so that he fell down dead;
which the crow seeing, came in an ecstasy of joy, and perched upon a
tree. "Avenant," said the crow, "you have been extremely generous to
succour me, who am but a poor wretched crow; but I am not ungrateful and
will do you as good a turn." Avenant admired the wit of the crow, and
continuing his journey, he entered into a wood so early one morning,
that he could scarcely see his way, where he heard an owl crying out
like an owl in despair. So looking about every where, he at length came
to a place where certain fowlers had spread their nets in the night-time
to catch little birds. "What pity 'tis," said he, "men are only made to
torment one another, or else to persecute poor animals who never do them
any harm!" So saying, he drew his knife, cut the cords, and set the owl
at liberty; who, before he took wing, said, "Avenant, the fowlers are
coming, I should have been taken, and must have died, without your
assistance: I have a grateful heart, and will remember it."
These were the three most remarkable adventures that befell Avenant in
his journey; and when he arrived at the end of it, he washed himself,
combed and powdered his hair, and put on a suit of cloth of gold: which
having done, he put a rich embroidered scarf about his neck, with a
small basket, wherein was a little dog which he was very fond of. And
Avenant was so amiable, and did every thing with so good a grace, that
when he presented himself at the gate of the palace, all the guards paid
him great respect, and every one strove who should first give notice to
the Fair One with Locks of Gold, that Avenant, the neighbouring king's
ambassador, demanded audience. The princess on hearing the name of
Avenant, said, "It has a pleasing sound, and I dare say he is agreeable
and pleases every body; and she said to her maids of honour, go fetch me
my rich embroidered gown of blue satin, dress my hair, and bring my
wreaths of fresh flowers: let me have my high shoes, and my fan, and let
my audience chamber and throne be clean, and richly adorned; for I would
have him every where with truth say, that I am really the Fair One with
Locks of Gold." Thus all her women were employed to dress her as a queen
should be. At length, she went to her great gallery of looking-glasses,
to see if any thing was wanting; after which she ascended her throne of
gold, ivory, and ebony, the fragrant smell of which was superior to the
choicest balm. She also commanded her maids of honour to take their
instruments, and play to their own singing so sweetly that none should
be disgusted.
Avenant was conducted into the chamber of audience, were he stood so
transported with admiration, that, as he afterwards said, he had
scarcely power to open his lips. At length, however, he took courage,
and made his speech wonderfully well; wherein he prayed the princess not
to let him be so unfortunate as to return without her. "Gentle Avenant,"
said she, "all the reasons you have laid before me, are very good, and I
assure you, I would rather favour you than any other; but you must know,
about a month since, I went to take the air by the side of a river, with
my maids of honour; as I was pulling off my glove, I pulled a ring from
my finger, which by accident fell into the river. This ring I valued
more than my whole kingdom; whence you may judge how much I am afflicted
by the loss of it. And I have made a vow never to hearken to any
proposals of marriage, unless the ambassador who makes them shall also
bring my ring. This is the present which you have to make me; otherwise
you may talk your heart out, for months and even years shall never
change my resolution." When he returned to his lodgings, he went to bed
supperless; and his little dog, who was called Cabriole, made a fasting
night of it too, and went and lay down by his master; who did nothing
all night but sigh and lament, saying, "How can I find a ring that fell
into a great river a month ago? It would be folly to attempt it. The
princess enjoined me this task, merely because she knew it was
impossible," he continued, greatly afflicted; which Cabriole observing,
said, "My dear master, pray do not despair of your good fortune; for you
are too good to be unhappy. Therefore, when it is day, let us go to the
river side." Avenant made no answer, but gave his dog two little cuffs
with his hand, and being overwhelmed with grief, fell asleep.
But when Cabriole perceived it was broad day, he fell a barking so loud
that he waked his master. "Rise, sir," said he, "put on your clothes,
and let us go and try our fortune." Avenant took his little dog's
advice; got up, and dressed himself, went down into the garden, and out
of the garden he walked insensibly to the river side, with his hat over
his eyes, and his arms across, thinking of nothing but taking his leave;
when all on a sudden he heard a voice call, "Avenant, Avenant!" upon
which he looked around him, but seeing nothing, he concluded it was an
illusion, and was proceeding in his walk; but he presently heard himself
called again. "Who calls me?" said he; Cabriole, who was very little and
looked closely into the water, cried out, "Never believe me, if it is
not a gilded carp." Immediately the carp appeared, and with an audible
voice said, "Avenant, you saved my life in the poplar meadow, where I
must have died without your assistance; and now I am come to requite
your kindness. Here, my dear Avenant, here is the ring which the Fair
One with Locks of Gold dropped into the river." Upon which he stooped
and took it out of the carp's mouth; to whom he returned a thousand
thanks. And now, instead of returning home, he went directly to the
palace with little Cabriole, who skipped about, and wagged his tail for
joy, that he had persuaded his master to walk by the side of the river.
The princess being told that Avenant desired an audience: "Alas," said
she, "the poor youth has come to take his leave of me! He has considered
what I enjoined him as impossible, and is returning to his master." But
Avenant being admitted, presented her the ring, saying, "Madam, behold I
have executed your command; and now, I hope, you will receive my master
for your royal consort." When she saw her ring, and that it was noways
injured, she was so amazed that she could hardly believe her eyes.
"Surely, courteous Avenant," said she, "you must be favoured by some
fairy; for naturally this is impossible." "Madam," said he, "I am
acquainted with no fairy; but I was willing to obey your command."
"Well, then, seeing you have so good a will," continued she, "you must
do me another piece of service, without which I will never marry. There
is a certain prince who lives not far from hence, whose name is
Galifron, and whom nothing would serve but that he must needs marry me.
He declared his mind to me, with most terrible menaces, that if I denied
him, he would enter my kingdom with fire and sword; but you shall judge
whether I would accept his proposal: he is a giant, as high as a
steeple; he devours men as an ape eats chestnuts; when he goes into the
country, he carries cannons in his pocket, to use instead of pistols;
and when he speaks aloud he deafens the ears of those that stand near
him. I answered him, that I did not choose to marry, and desired him to
excuse me. Nevertheless, he has not ceased to persecute me, and has put
an infinite number of my subjects to the sword: therefore, before all
other things you must fight him, and bring me his head."
Avenant was somewhat startled by this proposal; but, having considered
it awhile, "Well, madam," said he, "I will fight this Galifron; I
believe I shall be vanquished; but I will die like a man of courage."
The princess was astonished at his intrepidity, and said a thousand
things to dissuade him from it, but all in vain. At length he arrived at
Galifron's castle, the roads all the way being strewed with the bones
and carcasses of men which the giant had devoured, or cut in pieces. It
was not long before Avenant saw the monster approach, and he immediately
challenged him; but there was no occasion for this, for he lifted his
iron mace, and had certainly beat out the gentle Avenant's brains at the
first blow, had not a crow at that instant perched upon the giant's
head, and with his bill pecked out both his eyes. The blood trickled
down his face, whereat he grew desperate, and laid about him on every
side; but Avenant took care to avoid his blows, and gave him many great
wounds with his sword, which he pushed up to the very hilt; so that the
giant fainted, and fell down with loss of blood. Avenant immediately cut
off his head; and while he was in an ecstasy of joy, for his good
success, the crow perched upon a tree, and said, "Avenant, I did not
forget the kindnesses I received at your hands, when you killed the
eagle that pursued me; I promised to make you amends, and now I have
been as good as my word." "I acknowledge your kindness, Mr. Crow,"
replied Avenant; "I am still your debtor, and your servant." So saying,
he mounted his courser, and rode away with the giant's horrid head. When
he arrived at the city, every body crowded after him, crying out, "Long
live the valiant Avenant, who has slain the cruel monster!" so that the
princess, who heard the noise, and trembling for fear she should have
heard of Avenant's death, durst not inquire what was the matter. But
presently after, she saw Avenant enter with the giant's head; at the
sight of which she trembled, though there was nothing to fear. "Madam,"
said he, "behold your enemy is dead; and now, I hope, you will no longer
refuse the king my master." "Alas!" replied the Fair One with Locks of
Gold, "I must still refuse him, unless you can find means to bring me
some of the water of the gloomy cave. Not far from hence," continued
she, "there is a very deep cave, about six leagues in compass; the
entrance into which is guarded by two dragons. The dragons dart fire
from their mouths and eyes; and when you have got into this cave, you
will meet with a very deep hole, into which you must go down, and you
will find it full of toads, adders and serpents. At the bottom of this
hole there is a kind of cellar, through which runs the fountain of
beauty and health. This is the water I must have; its virtues are
wonderful; for the fair, by washing in it, preserve their beauty; and
the deformed it renders beautiful; if they are young, it preserves them
always youthful; and if old it makes them young again. Now judge you,
Avenant, whether I will ever leave my kingdom without carrying some of
this water along with me." "Madam," said he, "you are so beautiful, that
this water will be of no use to you; but I am an unfortunate ambassador,
whose death you seek. However, I will go in search of what you desire,
though I am certain never to return."
At length he arrived at the top of a mountain, where he sat down to rest
himself; giving his horse liberty to feed, and Cabriole to run after the
flies. He knew that the gloomy cave was not far off, and looked about to
see whether he could discover it; and at length he perceived a horrid
rock as black as ink, whence issued a thick smoke; and immediately after
he spied one of the dragons casting forth fire from his jaws and eyes;
his skin all over yellow and green, with prodigious claws and a long
tail rolled up in an hundred folds. Avenant, with a resolution to die in
the attempt, drew his sword, and with the phial which the Fair One with
Locks of Gold had given him to fill with the water of beauty, went
towards the cave, saying to his little dog, "Cabriole, here is an end of
me; I never shall be able to get this water, it is so well guarded by
the dragons; therefore when I am dead, fill this phial with my blood,
and carry it to my princess, that she may see what her severity has cost
me: then go to the king my master and give him an account of my
misfortunes." While he was saying this, he heard a voice call "Avenant,
Avenant!" "Who calls me?" said he; and presently he espied an owl in the
hole of an old hollow tree, who, calling him again, said, "You rescued
me from the fowler's net, where I had been assuredly taken, had you not
delivered me. I promised to make you amends, and now the time is come;
give me your phial; I am acquainted with all the secret inlets into the
gloomy cave, and will go and fetch you the water of beauty." Avenant
most gladly gave the phial, and the owl, entering without any impediment
into the cave, filled it, and in less than a quarter of an hour returned
with it well stopped. Avenant was overjoyed at his good fortune, gave
the owl a thousand thanks, and returned with a merry heart to the city.
Being arrived at the palace, he presented the phial to the Fair One with
Locks of Gold, who had then nothing further to say. She returned Avenant
thanks, and gave orders for every thing that was requisite for her
departure: after which she set forward with him. The Fair One with Locks
of Gold thought Avenant very amiable, and said to him sometimes upon the
road, "If you had been willing, I could have made you a king; and then
we need not have left my kingdom." But Avenant replied, "I would not
have been guilty of such a piece of treachery to my master for all the
kingdoms of the earth; though I must acknowledge your beauties are more
resplendent than the sun."
At length they arrived at the king's chief city, who understanding that
the Fair One with Locks of Gold was arrived, he went forth to meet her,
and made her the richest presents in the world. The nuptials were
solemnized with such demonstrations of joy, that nothing else was
discoursed of. But the Fair One with Locks of Gold, who loved Avenant in
her heart, was never pleased but when she was in his company, and would
be always speaking in his praise: "I had never come hither," said she to
the king, "had it not been for Avenant, who, to serve me, has conquered
impossibilities; you are infinitely obliged to him; he procured me the
water of beauty and health; by which I shall never grow old, and shall
always preserve my health and beauty." The enviers of Avenant's
happiness, who heard the queen's words, said to the king, "Were your
majesty inclined to be jealous, you have reason enough to be so, for the
queen is desperately in love with Avenant." "Indeed," said the king, "I
am sensible of the truth of what you tell me; let him be put in the
great tower, with fetters upon his feet and hands." Avenant was
immediately seized. However, his little dog Cabriole never forsook him,
but cheered him the best he could, and brought him all the news of the
court. When the Fair One with Locks of Gold was informed of his
misfortunes, she threw herself at the king's feet, and all in tears
besought him to release Avenant out of prison. But the more she besought
him the more he was incensed, believing it was her affection that made
her so zealous a suppliant in his behalf. Finding she could not prevail,
she said no more to him, but grew very pensive and melancholy.
The king took it into his head that she did not think him handsome
enough; so he resolved to wash his face with the water of beauty, in
hopes that the queen would then conceive a greater affection for him
than she had. This water stood in a phial upon a table in the queen's
chamber, where she had put it, that it might not be out of her sight.
But one of the chambermaids going to kill a spider with her besom, by
accident threw down the phial, and broke it, so that the water was lost.
She dried it up with all the speed she could, and not knowing what to
do, she bethought herself that she had seen a phial of clear water in
the king's cabinet very like that she had broken. Without any more ado,
therefore, she went and fetched that phial, and set it upon the table in
place of the other. This water which was in the king's cabinet, was a
certain water which he made use of to poison the great lords and princes
of his court when they were convicted of any great crime; to which
purpose, instead of cutting off their heads, or hanging them, he caused
their faces to be rubbed with this water, which cast them into so
profound a sleep that they never waked again. Now the king one evening
took this phial, and rubbed his face well with the water, after which he
fell asleep and died. Cabriole was one of the first that came to a
knowledge of this accident, and immediately ran to inform Avenant of it
who bid him go to the Fair One with Locks of Gold, and remind her of the
poor prisoner. Cabriole slipped unperceived through the crowd, for there
was a great noise and hurry at court upon the king's death; and getting
to the queen, "Madam," said he, "remember poor Avenant." She presently
called to mind the afflictions he had suffered for her sake, and his
fidelity. Without speaking a word, she went directly to the great tower,
and took off the fetters from Avenant's feet and hands herself; after
which, putting the crown upon his head, and the royal mantle about his
shoulders, "Amiable Avenant," said she, "I will make you a sovereign
prince, and take you for my consort." Avenant threw himself at her feet,
and in terms the most passionate and respectful returned her thanks.
Every body was overjoyed to have him for their king: the nuptials were
the most splendid in the world; and the Fair One. with Locks of Gold
lived a long time with her beloved Avenant, both happy and contented in
the enjoyment of each other.
TOM THUMB
In the days of King Arthur, Merlin, the most learned enchanter of his
time, was on a journey; and, being very weary, stopped one day at the
cottage of an honest ploughman to ask for refreshment. The ploughman's
wife, with great civility, immediately brought him some milk in a wooden
bowl, and some brown bread on a wooden platter. Merlin could not help
observing, that, although every thing within the cottage was
particularly neat and clean, and in good order, the ploughman and his
wife had the most sorrowful air imaginable. So he questioned them on the
cause of their melancholy, and learned that they were very miserable
because they had no children. The poor woman declared, with tears in her
eyes, that she should be the happiest creature in the world if she had a
son, although he were no bigger than his father's thumb. Merlin was much
amused with the thoughts of a boy no bigger than a man's thumb, and, as
soon as he returned home, he sent for the queen of the fairies (with
whom he was very intimate), and related to her the desire of the
ploughman and his wife to have a son the size of his father's thumb. The
queen of the fairies liked the plan exceedingly, and declared their wish
should speedily be granted. Accordingly the ploughman's wife had a son,
who in a few minutes grew as tall as his father's thumb. The queen of
the fairies came in at the window as the mother was sitting up in bed
admiring the child. The queen kissed the infant, and giving it the name
of Tom Thumb, immediately summoned several fairies from Fairy Land to
clothe her little new favourite:
  "An oak leaf hat he had for his crown,
   His shirt it was by spiders spun;
   With doublet wove of thistle's down,
   His trousers up with points were done.
   His stockings, of apple rind, they tie
   With eye-lash plucked from his mother's eye,
   His shoes were made of a mouse's skin,
   Nicely tanned, with the hair within."
Tom never was any bigger than his father's thumb, which was not a large
thumb either; but, as he grew older, he became very cunning and sly, for
which his mother did not sufficiently correct him, so that when he was
able to play with the boys for cherry stones, and had lost all his own,
he used to creep into the boys' bags, fill his pockets, and come out
again to play. But one day as he was getting out of a bag of cherry
stones, the boy to whom it belonged chanced to see him. "Ah ha, my
little Tom Thumb!" said the boy, "have I caught you at your bad tricks
at last? Now I will reward you for thieving." Then drawing the string
tight round his neck, and shaking the bag heartily, the cherry stones
bruised Tom's legs, thighs, and body sadly; which made him beg to be let
out, and promise never to be guilty of such things any more. Shortly
afterwards, Tom's mother was making a batter pudding, and, that he might
see how she mixed it, he climbed on the edge of the bowl; but his foot
happening to slip, he fell over head and ears into the batter, and his
mother not observing him, stirred him into the pudding, and popped him
into the pot to boil. The hot water made Tom kick and struggle; and his
mother, seeing the pudding jump up and down in such a furious manner,
thought it was bewitched; and a tinker coming by just at the time, she
quickly gave him the pudding, who put it into his budget and walked on.
As soon as Tom could get the batter out of his mouth, he began to cry
aloud; which so frightened the poor tinker, that he flung the pudding
over the hedge, and ran away from it as fast as he could run. The
pudding being broken to pieces by the fall, Tom was released, and walked
home to his mother, who gave him a kiss and put him to bed. Tom Thumb's
mother once took him with her when she went to milk the cow; and it
being a very windy day, she tied him with a needleful of thread to a
thistle, that he might not be blown away. The cow liking his oak leaf
hat took him and the thistle up at one mouthful. While the cow chewed
the thistle, Tom, terrified at her great teeth, which seemed ready to
crush him to pieces, roared, "Mother, Mother!" as loud as he could bawl.
"Where are you, Tommy, my dear Tommy?" said the mother. "Here, mother,
here in the red cow's mouth." The mother began to cry and wring her
hands; but the cow surprised at such odd noises in her throat, opened
her mouth and let him drop out. His mother clapped him into her apron,
and ran home with him. Tom's father made him a whip of a barley straw to
drive the cattle with, and being one day in the field, he slipped into a
deep furrow. A raven flying over, picked him up with a grain of corn,
and flew with him to the top of a giant's castle, by the seaside, where
he left him; and old Grumbo the giant, coming soon after to walk upon
his terrace, swallowed Tom like a pill, clothes and all. Tom presently
made the giant very uncomfortable, and he threw him up into the sea. A
great fish then swallowed him. The fish was soon after caught, and sent
as a present to King Arthur. When it was cut open, every body was
delighted with little Tom Thumb. The king made him his dwarf; he was the
favourite of the whole court; and, by his merry pranks, often amused the
queen and the knights of the Round Table. The king, when he rode on
horseback, frequently took Tom in his hand; and, if a shower of rain
came on, he used to creep into the king's waist-coat pocket, and sleep
till the rain was over. The king also, sometimes questioned Tom
concerning his parents; and when Tom informed his majesty they were very
poor people, the king led him into his treasury, and told him he should
pay his friends a visit, and take with him as much money as he could
carry. Tom procured a little purse, and putting a threepenny piece into
it, with much labour and difficulty got it upon his back; and, after
travelling two days and nights, arrived at his father's house.
His mother met him at the door, almost tired to death, having in
forty-eight hours travelled almost half a mile with a huge silver
threepence upon his back. His parents were glad to see him, especially
when he had brought such an amazing sum of money with him. They placed
him in a walnut shell by the fire side, and feasted him for three days
upon a hazel nut, which made him sick, for a whole nut usually served
him a month. Tom got well, but could not travel because it had rained;
therefore his mother took him in her hand, and with one puff blew him
into King Arthur's court; where Tom entertained the king, queen, and
nobility at tilts and tournaments, at which he exerted himself so much
that he brought on a fit of sickness, and his life was despaired of. At
this juncture the queen of the fairies came in a chariot drawn by flying
mice, placed Tom by her side, and drove through the air, without
stopping till they arrived at her palace; when, after restoring him to
health, and permitting him to enjoy all the gay diversions of Fairy
Land, the queen commanded a fair wind, and, placing Tom before it, blew
him straight to the court of King Arthur. But just as Tom should have
alighted in the court-yard of the palace, the cook happened to pass along
with the king's great bowl of firmity (King Arthur loved firmity), and
poor Tom Thumb fell plump into the middle of it and splashed the hot
firmity into the cook's eyes. Down went the bowl. "Oh dear; oh dear!"
cried Tom; "Murder! murder!" bellowed the cook! and away ran the king's
nice firmity into the kennel. The cook was a red-faced, cross fellow,
and swore to the king, that Tom had done it out of mere mischief; so he
was taken up, tried, and sentenced to be beheaded. Tom hearing this
dreadful sentence, and seeing a miller stand by with his mouth wide
open, he took a good spring, and jumped down the miller's throat,
unperceived by all, even by the miller himself.
Tom being lost, the court broke up, and away went the miller to his
mill. But Tom did not leave him long at rest, he began to roll and
tumble about, so that the miller thought himself bewitched, and sent for
a doctor. When the doctor came, Tom began to dance and sing; the doctor
was as much frightened as the miller, and sent in great haste for five
more doctors, and twenty learned men. While all these were debating upon
the affair, the miller (for they were very tedious) happened to yawn,
and Tom, taking the opportunity, made another jump, and alighted on his
feet in the middle of the table. The miller, provoked to be thus
tormented by such a little creature, fell into a great passion, caught
hold of Tom, and threw him out of the window, into the river. A large
salmon swimming by, snapped him up in a minute. The salmon was soon
caught and sold in the market to the steward of a lord. The lord,
thinking it an uncommon fine fish, made a present of it to the king, who
ordered it to be dressed immediately. When the cook cut open the salmon,
he found poor Tom, and ran with him directly to the king; but the king
being busy with state affairs, desired that he might be brought another
day. The cook resolving to keep him safely this time, as he had so
lately given him the slip, clapped him into a mouse-trap, and left him
to amuse himself by peeping through the wires for a whole week; when the
king sent for him, he forgave him for throwing down the firmity, ordered
him new clothes and knighted him.
  "His shirt was made of butterflies' wings;
   His boots were made of chicken skins;
   His coat and breeches were made with pride;
   A tailor's needle hung by his side;
   A mouse for a horse he used to ride."
Thus dressed and mounted, he rode a hunting with the king and nobility,
who all laughed heartily at Tom and his fine prancing steed. As they
rode by a farm house one day, a cat jumped from behind the door, seized
the mouse and little Tom, and began to devour the mouse. However, Tom
boldly drew his sword and attacked the cat, who then let him fall. The
king and his nobles seeing Tom falling, went to his assistance, and one
of the lords caught him in his hat; but poor Tom was sadly scratched,
and his clothes were torn by the claws of the cat. In this condition he
was carried home, when a bed of down was made for him in a little ivory
cabinet. The queen of the fairies came, and took him again to Fairy
Land, where she kept him for some years; and then, dressing him in
bright green, sent him flying once more through the air to the earth, in
the days of King Thunstone. The people flocked far and near to look at
him; and the king, before whom he was carried, asked him who he was,
whence he came, and where he lived? Tom answered:
  "My name is Tom Thumb,
   From the Fairies I come;
   When King Arthur shone,
   This court was my home.
   In me he delighted,
   By him I was knighted,
   Did you never hear of
   Sir Thomas Thumb?"
The king was so charmed with this address, that he ordered a little
chair to be made, in order that Tom might sit on his table, and also a
palace of gold a span high, with a door an inch wide, for little Tom to
live in. He also gave him a coach drawn by six small mice. This made the
queen angry, because she had not a new coach too. Therefore, resolving
to ruin Tom, she complained to the king that he had behaved very
insolently to her. The king sent for him in a rage. Tom, to escape his
fury, crept into an empty snail-shell, and there lay till he was almost
starved; when peeping out of the shell, he saw a fine butterfly settled
on the ground. He now ventured out, and getting astride, the butterfly
took wing, and mounted into the air with little Tom on his back. Away he
flew from field to field, from tree to tree, till at last he flew to the
king's court. The king, queen, and nobles, all strove to catch the
butterfly, but could not. At length poor Tom, having neither bridle nor
saddle, slipped from his seat, and fell into a white pot, where he was
found almost drowned. The queen vowed he should be guillotined: but
while the guillotine was getting ready, he was secured once more in a
mouse-trap; when the cat seeing something stir, and supposing it to be
the mouse, patted the trap about till she broke it, and set Tom at
liberty. Soon afterwards a spider, taking him for a fly, made at him.
Tom drew his sword and fought valiantly, but the spider's poisonous
breath overcame him:
  "He fell dead on the ground where late he had stood,
   And the spider sucked up the last drop of his blood."
King Thunstone and his whole court went into mourning for little Tom
Thumb. They buried him under a rosebush, and raised a nice white marble
monument over his grave, with the following epitaph:
  "Here lies Tom Thumb, King Arthur's knight,
   Who died by spider's cruel bite.
   He was well known in Arthur's court,
   Where he afforded gallant sport;
   He rode at tilt and tournament,
   And on a mouse a hunting went;
   Alive he filled the court with mirth,
   His death to sorrow soon gave birth.
   Wipe, wipe your eyes, and shake your head
   And cry, 'Alas! Tom Thumb is dead.'"
BLUE BEARD
There was, some time ago, a gentleman who was very rich. He had fine
town and country houses, his dishes and plates were all of gold or
silver, his rooms were hung with damask, his chairs and sofas were
covered with the richest silks, and his carriages were all gilt with
gold in a grand style. But it happened that this gentleman had a blue
beard, which made him so very frightful and ugly, that none of the
ladies, in the parts where he lived, would venture to go into his
company. Now there was a certain lady of rank, who lived very near him,
and had two daughters, both of them of very great beauty. Blue Beard
asked her to bestow one of them upon him for a wife, and left it to
herself to choose which of the two it should be. But both the young
ladies again and again said they would never marry Blue Beard; yet, to
be as civil as they could, each of them said, the only reason why she
would not have him was, because she was loath to hinder her sister from
the match, which would be such a good one for her. Still the truth of
the matter was, they could neither of them bear the thoughts of having a
husband with a blue beard; and besides, they had heard of his having
been married to several wives before, and nobody could tell what had
ever become of any of them. As Blue Beard wished very much to gain their
favour, he asked the lady and her daughters, and some ladies who were on
a visit at their house, to go with him to one of his country seats,
where they spent a whole week, during which they passed all their time
in nothing but parties for hunting and fishing, music, dancing, and
feasts. No one even thought of going to bed, and the nights were passed
in merry-makings of all kinds. In short, the time rolled on in so much
pleasure, that the youngest of the two sisters began to think that the
beard which she had been so much afraid of, was not so very blue, and
that the gentleman who owned it was vastly civil and pleasing. Soon
after their return home, she told her mother that she had no longer any
dislike to accept of Blue Beard for her husband; and in a very short
time they were married.
About a month after the marriage had taken place, Blue Beard told his
wife that he should be forced to leave her for a few weeks, as he had
some affairs to attend to in the country. He desired her to be sure to
indulge herself in every kind of pleasure, to invite as many of her
friends as she liked, and to treat them with all sorts of dainties, that
her time might pass pleasantly till he came back again. "Here," said he,
"are the keys of the two large wardrobes. This is the key of the great
box that contains the best plate, which we use for company, this belongs
to my strong box, where I keep my money, and this belongs to the casket,
in which are all my jewels. Here also is a master-key to all the rooms
in the house; but this small key belongs to the closet at the end of the
long gallery on the ground floor. I give you leave," said he, "to open,
or to do what you like with all the rest except this closet. This, my
dear, you must not enter, nor even put the key into the lock, for all
the world. If you do not obey me in this one thing, you must expect the
most dreadful punishments." She promised to obey his orders in the most
faithful manner; and Blue Beard, after kissing her tenderly, stepped
into his coach, and drove away.
When Blue Beard was gone, the friends of his wife did not wait to be
asked, so eager were they to see all the riches and fine things she had
gained by marriage; for they had none of them gone to the wedding, on
account of their dislike to the blue beard of the bridegroom. As soon as
ever they came to the house, they ran about from room to room, from
closet to closet, and then from wardrobe to wardrobe, looking into each
with wonder and delight, and said, that every fresh one they came to,
was richer and finer than what they had seen the moment before. At last
they came to the drawing-rooms, where their surprise was made still
greater by the costly grandeur of the hangings, the sofas, the chairs,
carpets, tables, sideboards, and looking-glasses; the frames of these
last were silver-gilt, most richly adorned, and in the glasses they saw
themselves from head to foot. In short, nothing could exceed the
richness of what they saw; and they all did not fail to admire and envy
the good fortune of their friend. But all this time the bride herself
was far from thinking about the fine speeches they made to her, for she
was eager to see what was in the closet her husband had told her not to
open. So great, indeed, was her desire to do this, that, without once
thinking how rude it would be to leave her guests, she slipped away down
a private staircase that led to this forbidden closet, and in such a
hurry, that she was two or three times in danger of falling down stairs
and breaking her neck.
When she reached the door of the closet, she stopped for a few moments
to think of the order her husband had given her, and how he had told her
that he would not fail to keep his word and punish her very severely, if
she did not obey him. But she was so very curious to know what was
inside, that she made up her mind to venture in spite of every thing.
She then, with a trembling hand, put the key into the lock, and the door
straight flew open. As the window shutters were closed, she at first
could see nothing; but in a short time she saw that the floor was
covered with clotted blood, on which the bodies of several dead women
were lying.
These were all the wives whom Blue Beard had married, and killed one
after another. At this sight she was ready to sink with fear, and the
key of the closet door, which she held in her hand, fell on the floor.
When she had a little got the better of her fright, she took it up,
locked the door, and made haste back to her own room, that she might
have a little time to get into a humour to amuse her company; but this
she could not do, so great was her fright at what she had seen. As she
found that the key of the closet had got stained with blood in falling
on the floor, she wiped it two or three times over to clean it; yet
still the blood kept on it the same as before. She next washed it, but
the blood did not move at all. She then scoured it with brickdust, and
after with sand, but in spite of all she could do, the blood was still
there; for the key was a fairy who was Blue Beard's friend; so that as
fast as she got off the blood on one side, it came again on the other.
Early in the same evening Blue Beard came home, saying, that before he
had gone far on his journey he was met by a horseman, who was coming to
tell him that his affair in the country was settled without his being
present; upon which his wife said every thing she could think of, to
make him believe she was in a transport of joy at his sudden return.
The next morning he asked her for the keys: she gave them to him; but as
she could not help showing her fright, Blue Beard easily guessed what
had been the matter. "How is it," said he, "that the key of the closet
upon the ground floor is not here?" "Is it not?" said the wife, "then I
must have left it on my dressing-table." "Be sure you give it me by and
by," replied Blue Beard. After going a good many times backwards and
forwards, as if she was looking for the key, she was at last forced to
give it to Blue Beard. He looked hard at it, and then said: "How came
this blood upon the key?" "I am sure I do not know," replied the poor
lady, at the same time turning as white as a sheet. "You do not know?"
said Blue Beard sternly, "but I know well enough. You have been in the
closet on the ground floor! Very well, madam: since you are so mighty
fond of this closet, you shall be sure to take your place among the
ladies you saw there." His wife, who was almost dead with fear, now fell
upon her knees, asked his pardon a thousand times for her fault, and
begged him to forgive her, looking all the time so very mournful and
lovely, that she would have melted any heart that was not harder than a
rock. But Blue Beard only said, "No, no, madam; you shall die this very
minute!" "Alas!" said the poor trembling creature, "if I must die, give
me, as least, a little time to say my prayers." "I give you," replied
the cruel Blue Beard, "half a quarter of an hour: not a moment longer."
When Blue Beard had left her to herself, she called her sister; and
after telling her, as well as she could for sobbing, that she had but
half a quarter of an hour to live; "Prithee," said she, "sister Anne,"
(this was her sister's name), "run up to the top of the tower, and see
if my brothers are not in sight, for they said they would visit me
to-day, and if you see them, make a sign for them to gallop on as fast
as ever they can." Her sister straight did as she was desired; and the
poor trembling lady every minute cried out to her: "Anne! sister Anne!
do you see any one coming?" Her sister said, "I see nothing but the sun,
which makes a dust, and the grass, which looks green."
In the meanwhile, Blue Beard, with a great cimeter in his hand, bawled
as loud as he could to his wife, "Come down at once, or I will fetch
you." "One moment longer, I beseech you," replied she, and again called
softly to her sister, "Sister Anne, do you see any one coming?" To which
she answered, "I see nothing but the sun, which makes a dust, and the
grass, which looks green." Blue Beard now again bawled out, "Come down,
I say, this very moment, or I shall come to fetch you." "I am coming;
indeed I will come in one minute," sobbed his wretched wife. Then she
once more cried out, "Anne! sister Anne! do you see any one coming?" "I
see," said her sister, "a cloud of dust a little to the left." "Do you
think it is my brothers?" said the wife. "Alas! no, dear sister,"
replied she, "it is only a flock of sheep." "Will you come down, madam?"
said Blue Beard, in the greatest rage. "Only one single moment more,"
said she. And then she called out for the last time, "Sister Anne!
sister Anne! do you see no one coming?" "I see," replied her sister,
"two men on horseback coming; but they are still a great way off."
"Thank God," cried she, "they are my brothers; beckon them to make
haste." Blue Beard now cried out so loud for her to come down, that his
voice shook the whole house. The poor lady, with her hair loose, and all
in tears, now came down, and fell on her knees, begging him to spare her
life; but he stopped her, saying, "All this is of no use, for you shall
die," and then, seizing her by the hair, raised his cimeter to strike
off her head. The poor woman now begged a single moment to say one
prayer. "No, no," said Blue Beard, "I will give you no more time. You
have had too much already." And again he raised his arm. Just at this
instant a loud knocking was heard at the gates, which made Blue Beard
wait for a moment to see who it was. The gates now flew open, and two
officers, dressed in their uniform, came in, and, with their swords in
their hands, ran straight to Blue Beard, who, seeing they were his
wife's brothers, tried to escape from their presence; but they pursued
and seized him before he had gone twenty steps, and plunging their
swords into his body he fell down dead at their feet.
The poor wife, who was almost as dead as her husband, was not able at
first to rise and embrace her brothers; but she soon came to herself;
and, as Blue Beard had no heirs, she found herself the owner of his
great riches. She gave a part of his vast fortune as a marriage dowry to
her sister Anne, who soon after became the wife of a young gentleman who
had long loved her. Some of the money she laid out in buying captains'
commissions for her two brothers, and the rest she gave to a worthy
gentleman whom she married shortly after, and whose kind treatment soon
made her forget Blue Beard's cruelty.
CINDERELLA; OR, THE LITTLE GLASS SLIPPER
There was once a very rich gentleman who lost his wife, and having loved
her exceedingly, he was very sorry when she died. Finding himself quite
unhappy for her loss, he resolved to marry a second time, thinking by
this means he should be as happy as before. Unfortunately, however, the
lady he chanced to fix upon was the proudest and most haughty woman ever
known; she was always out of humour with every one; nobody could please
her, and she returned the civilities of those about her with the most
affronting disdain. She had two daughters by a former husband. These she
brought up to be proud and idle. Indeed, in temper and behaviour they
perfectly resembled their mother; they did not love their books, and
would not learn to work; in short they were disliked by every body. The
gentleman on his side too had a daughter, who in sweetness of temper and
carriage was the exact likeness of her own mother, whose death he had so
much lamented, and whose tender care of the little girl he was in hopes
to see replaced by that of his new bride. But scarcely was the marriage
ceremony over, before his wife began to show her real temper. She could
not bear the pretty little girl, because her sweet obliging manners made
those of her own daughters appear a thousand times the more odious and
disagreeable. She therefore ordered her to live in the kitchen; and, if
ever she brought any thing into the parlour, always scolded her till she
was out of sight. She made her work with the servants in washing the
dishes, and rubbing the tables and chairs; it was her place to clean
madam's chamber, and that of the misses her daughters, which was all
inlaid, had beds of the newest fashion, and looking-glasses so long and
broad, that they saw themselves from head to foot in them; while the
little creature herself was forced to sleep up in a sorry garret, upon a
wretched straw bed, without curtains, or any thing to make her
comfortable. The poor child bore this with the greatest patience, not
daring to complain to her father, who, she feared, would only reprove
her, for she saw that his wife governed him entirely. When she had done
all her work she used to sit in the chimney-corner among the cinders; so
that in the house she went by the name of Cinderbreech. The youngest of
the two sisters, however, being rather more civil than the eldest,
called her Cinderella. And Cinderella, dirty and ragged as she was, as
often happens in such cases, was a thousand times prettier than her
sisters, drest out in all their splendour. It happened that the king's
son gave a ball, to which he invited all the persons of fashion in the
country. Our two misses were of the number, for the king's son did not
know how disagreeable they were, but supposed, as they were so much
indulged, that they were extremely amiable. He did not invite
Cinderella, for he had never seen or heard of her.
The two sisters began immediately to be very busy in preparing for the
happy day. Nothing could exceed their joy. Every moment of their time
was spent in fancying such gowns, shoes, and head-dresses as would set
them off to the greatest advantage. All this was new vexation to poor
Cinderella, for it was she who ironed and plaited her sisters' linen.
They talked of nothing but how they should be dressed: "I," said the
eldest, "will wear my scarlet velvet with French trimming." "And I,"
said the youngest, "shall wear the same petticoat I had made for the
last ball. But then, to make amends for that, I shall put on my gold
muslin train, and wear my diamonds in my hair; with these I must
certainly look well." They sent several miles for the best hair dresser
that was to be had, and all their ornaments were bought at the most
fashionable shops. On the morning of the ball, they called up Cinderella
to consult with her about their dress, for they knew she had a great
deal of taste. Cinderella gave them the best advice she could, and even
offered to assist in adjusting their head-dresses; which was exactly
what they wanted, and they accordingly accepted her proposal. While
Cinderella was busily engaged in dressing her sisters, they said to her,
"Should you not like, Cinderella, to go to the ball?" "Ah!" replied
Cinderella, "you are only laughing at me, it is not for such as I am to
think of going to balls." "You are in the right," said they, "folks
might laugh indeed, to see a Cinderbreech dancing in a ball room." Any
other than Cinderella would have tried to make the haughty creatures
look as ugly as she could; but the sweet tempered girl on the contrary,
did every thing she could think of to make them look well. The sisters
had scarcely eaten any thing for two days, so great was their joy as the
happy day drew near. More than a dozen laces were broken in endeavouring
to give them a fine slender shape, and they were always before the
looking glass. At length the much wished for moment arrived; the proud
misses stepped into a beautiful carriage, and, followed by servants in
rich liveries, drove towards the palace. Cinderella followed them with
her eyes as far as she could; and when they were out of sight, she sat
down in a corner and began to cry. Her godmother, who saw her in tears,
asked her what ailed her. "I wish----I w-i-s-h--" sobbed poor
Cinderella, without being able to say another word. The godmother, who
was a fairy, said to her, "You wish to go to the ball, Cinderella, is
not this the truth?" "Alas! yes," replied the poor child, sobbing still
more than before. "Well, well, be a good girl," said the godmother, "and
you shall go." She then led Cinderella to her bedchamber, and said to
her: "Run into the garden and bring me a pumpkin." Cinderella flew like
lightning, and brought the finest she could lay hold of. Her godmother
scooped out the inside, leaving nothing but the rind; she then struck it
with her wand, and the pumpkin instantly became a fine coach gilded all
over with gold. She then looked into her mouse-trap, where she found six
mice all alive and brisk. She told Cinderella to lift up the door of the
trap very gently; and as the mice passed out, she touched them one by
one with her wand, and each immediately became a beautiful horse of a
fine dapple gray mouse colour. "Here, my child," said the godmother, "is
a coach and horses too, as handsome as your sisters', but what shall we
do for a postillion?" "I will run," replied Cinderella, "and see if
there be not a rat in the trap. If I find one, he will do very well for
a postillion." "Well thought of, my child," said her godmother; "make
what haste you can."
Cinderella brought the rat trap, which, to her great joy, contained
three of the largest rats ever seen. The fairy chose the one which had
the longest beard; and touching him with her wand, he was instantly
turned into a handsome postillion, with the finest pair of whiskers
imaginable. She next said to Cinderella: "Go again into the garden, and
you will find six lizards behind the watering-pot; bring them hither."
This was no sooner done, than with a stroke from the fairy's wand they
were changed into six footmen, who all jumped up behind the coach in
their laced liveries, and stood side by side as cleverly as if they had
been used to nothing else the whole of their lives. The fairy then said
to Cinderella: "Well, my dear, is not this such an equipage as you could
wish for to take you to the ball? Are you not delighted with it?"
"Y-e-s," replied Cinderella with hesitation, "but must I go thither in
these filthy rags?" Her godmother touched her with the wand, and her
rags instantly became the most magnificent apparel, ornamented with the
most costly jewels in the whole world. To these she added a beautiful
pair of glass slippers, and bade her set out for the palace. The fairy,
however, before she took leave of Cinderella, strictly charged her on no
account whatever to stay at the ball after the clock had struck twelve,
telling her that, should she stay but a single moment after that time,
her coach would again become a pumpkin, her horses mice, her footmen
lizards, and her fine clothes be changed to filthy rags. Cinderella did
not fail to promise all her godmother desired of her; and almost wild
with joy drove away to the palace. As soon as she arrived, the king's
son, who had been informed that a great princess, whom nobody knew, was
come to the ball, presented himself at the door of her carriage, helped
her out, and conducted her to the ball room. Cinderella no sooner
appeared than every one was silent; both the dancing and the music
stopped, and every body was employed in gazing at the uncommon beauty of
this unknown stranger. Nothing was heard but whispers of "How handsome
she is!" The king himself, old as he was, could not keep his eyes from
her, and continually repeated to the queen, that it was a long time
since he had seen so lovely a creature. The ladies endeavoured to find
out how her clothes were made, that they might get some of the same
pattern for themselves by the next day, should they be lucky enough to
meet with such handsome materials, and such good work-people to make
The king's son conducted her to the most honourable seat, and soon after
took her out to dance with him. She both moved and danced so gracefully,
that every one admired her still more than before, and she was thought
the most beautiful and accomplished lady they ever beheld. After some
time a delicious collation was served up; but the young prince was so
busily employed in looking at her, that he did not eat a morsel.
Cinderella seated herself near her sisters, paid them a thousand
attentions, and offered them a part of the oranges and sweetmeats with
which the prince had presented her, while they on their part were quite
astonished at these civilities from a lady whom they did not know. As
they were conversing together, Cinderella heard the clock strike eleven
and three quarters. She rose from her seat, curtesied to the company,
and hastened away as fast as she could. As soon as she got home she flew
to her godmother, and, after thanking her a thousand times, told her she
would give the world to be able to go again to the ball the next day,
for the king's son had entreated her to be there. While she was telling
her godmother every thing that had happened to her at the ball, the two
sisters knocked a loud rat-tat-tat at the door; which Cinderella opened.
"How late you have stayed!" said she, yawning, rubbing her eyes, and
stretching herself, as if just awakened out of her sleep, though she had
in truth felt no desire for sleep since they left her. "If you had been
at the ball," said one of her sisters, "let me tell you, you would not
have been sleepy. There came thither the handsomest, yes, the very
handsomest princess ever beheld! She paid us a thousand attentions, and
made us take a part of the oranges and sweetmeats the prince had given
her." Cinderella could scarcely contain herself for joy: she asked her
sisters the name of this princess, to which they replied, that nobody
had been able to discover who she was; that the king's son was extremely
grieved on that account, and had offered a large reward to any person
who could find out where she came from. Cinderella smiled, and said:
"How very beautiful she must be! How fortunate you are! Ah, could I but
see her for a single moment! Dear Miss Charlotte, lend me only the
yellow gown you wear every day, and let me go to see her." "Oh! yes, I
warrant you; lend my clothes to a Cinderbreech! Do you really suppose me
such a fool? No, no; pray, Miss Forward, mind your proper business, and
leave dress and balls to your betters." Cinderella expected some such
answer, and was by no means sorry, for she would have been sadly at a
loss what to do if her sister had lent her the clothes that she asked of
her.
The next day the two sisters again appeared at the ball, and so did
Cinderella, but dressed much more magnificently than the night before.
The king's son was continually by her side, and said the most obliging
things imaginable to her. The charming young creature was far from being
tired of all the agreeable things she met with. On the contrary, she was
so delighted with them that she entirely forgot the charge her godmother
had given her. Cinderella at last heard the striking of a clock, and
counted one, two, three, on till she came to twelve, though she thought
that it could be but eleven at most. She got up and flew as nimbly as a
deer out of the ball-room. The prince tried to overtake her; but poor
Cinderella's fright made her run the faster. However, in her great
hurry, she dropped one of her glass slippers from her foot, which the
prince stooped down and picked up, and took the greatest care of it
possible. Cinderella got home tired and out of breath, in her old
clothes, without either coach or footmen, and having nothing left of her
magnificence but the fellow of the glass slipper which she had dropped.
In the mean while, the prince had inquired of all his guards at the
palace gates, if they had not seen a magnificent princess pass out, and
which way she went? The guards replied, that no princess had passed the
gates; and that they had not seen a creature but a little ragged girl,
who looked more like a beggar than a princess. When the two sisters
returned from the ball, Cinderella asked them if they had been as much
amused as the night before, and if the beautiful princess had been
there? They told her that she had; but that as soon as the clock struck
twelve, she hurried away from the ball room, and in the great haste she
had made, had dropped one of her glass slippers, which was the prettiest
shape that could be; that the king's son had picked it up, and had done
nothing but look at it all the rest of the evening; and that every body
believed he was violently in love with the handsome lady to whom it
belonged.
This was very true; for a few days after, the prince had it proclaimed,
by sound of trumpet, that he would marry the lady whose foot should
exactly fit the slipper he had found. Accordingly the prince's
messengers took the slipper, and carried it first to all the princesses,
then to the duchesses, in short, to all the ladies of the court. But
without success. They then brought it to the two sisters, who each tried
all she could to squeeze her foot into the slipper, but saw at last that
this was quite impossible. Cinderella who was looking at them all the
while, and knew her slipper, could not help smiling, and ventured to
say, "Pray, sir, let me try to get on the slipper." The gentleman made
her sit down; and putting the slipper to her foot, it instantly slipped
in, and he saw that it fitted her like wax. The two sisters were amazed
to see that the slipper fitted Cinderella; but how much greater was
their astonishment when she drew out of her pocket the other slipper and
put it on! Just at this moment the fairy entered the room, and touching
Cinderella's clothes with her wand, made her all at once appear more
magnificently dressed than they had ever seen her before.
The two sisters immediately perceived that she was the beautiful
princess they had seen at the ball. They threw themselves at her feet,
and asked her forgiveness for the ill treatment she had received from
them. Cinderella helped them to rise, and, tenderly embracing them, said
that she forgave them with all her heart, and begged them to bestow on
her their affection. Cinderella was then conducted, dressed as she was,
to the young prince, who finding her more beautiful than ever, instantly
desired her to accept of his hand. The marriage ceremony took place in a
few days; and Cinderella, who was as amiable as she was handsome, gave
her sisters magnificent apartments in the palace, and a short time after
married them to two great lords of the court.
PUSS IN BOOTS
There was a miller who had three sons, and when he died he divided what
he possessed among them in the following manner: He gave his mill to the
eldest, his ass to the second, and his cat to the youngest. Each of the
brothers accordingly took what belonged to him, without the help of an
attorney, who would soon have brought their little fortune to nothing,
in law expenses. The poor young fellow who had nothing but the cat,
complained that he was hardly used: "My brothers," said he, "by joining
their stocks together, may do well in the world, but for me, when I have
eaten my cat, and made a fur cap of his skin, I may soon die of hunger!"
The cat, who all this time sat listening just inside the door of a
cupboard, now ventured to come out and addressed him as follows: "Do not
thus afflict yourself, my good master. You have only to give me a bag,
and get a pair of boots made for me, so that I may scamper through the
dirt and the brambles, and you shall see that you are not so ill
provided for as you imagine." Though the cat's master did not much
depend upon these promises, yet, as he had often observed the cunning
tricks puss used to catch the rats and mice, such as hanging upon his
hind legs, and hiding in the meal to make believe that he was dead, he
did not entirely despair of his being of some use to him in his unhappy
condition.
When the cat had obtained what he asked for, he gayly began to equip
himself: he drew on his boots; and putting the bag about his neck, he
took hold of the strings with his fore paws, and bidding his master take
courage, immediately sallied forth. The first attempt Puss made was to
go into a warren in which there were a great number of rabbits. He put
some bran and some parsley into his bag; and then stretching himself out
at full length as if he was dead, he waited for some young rabbits, who
as yet knew nothing of the cunning tricks of the world, to come and get
into the bag, the better to feast upon the dainties he had put into it.
Scarcely had he lain down before he succeeded as well as could be
wished. A giddy young rabbit crept into the bag, and the cat immediately
drew the strings, and killed him without mercy. Puss, proud of his prey,
hastened directly to the palace, where he asked to speak to the king. On
being shown into the apartment of his majesty, he made a low bow, and
said, "I have brought you, sire, this rabbit from the warren of my lord
the marquis of Carabas, who commanded me to present it to your majesty
with the assurance of his respect." (This was the title the cat thought
proper to bestow upon his master.) "Tell my lord marquis of Carabas,"
replied the king, "that I accept of his present with pleasure, and that
I am greatly obliged to him." Soon after, the cat laid himself down in
the same manner in a field of corn, and had as much good fortune as
before; for two fine partridges got into his bag, which he immediately
killed and carried to the palace: the king received them as he had done
the rabbit, and ordered his servants to give the messenger something to
drink. In this manner he continued to carry presents of game to the king
from my lord marquis of Carabas, once at least in every week.
One day, the cat having heard that the king intended to take a ride that
morning by the river's side with his daughter, who was the most
beautiful princess in the world, he said to his master: "If you will but
follow my advice, your fortune is made. Take off your clothes, and bathe
yourself in the river, just in the place I shall show you, and leave the
rest to me," The marquis of Carabas did exactly as he was desired,
without being able to guess at what the cat intended. While he was
bathing the king passed by, and puss directly called out as loud as he
could bawl: "Help! help! My lord marquis of Carabas is in danger of
being drowned!" The king hearing the cries, put his head out at the
window of his carriage to see what was the matter: when, perceiving the
very cat who had brought him so many presents, he ordered his attendants
to go directly to the assistance of my lord marquis of Carabas. While
they were employed in taking the marquis out of the river, the cat ran
to the king's carriage, and told his majesty, that while his master was
bathing, some thieves had run off with his clothes as they lay by the
river's side; the cunning cat all the time having hid them under a large
stone. The king hearing this, commanded the officers of his wardrobe to
fetch one of the handsomest suits it contained, and present it to my
lord marquis of Carabas, at the same time loading him with a thousand
attentions. As the fine clothes they brought him made him look like a
gentleman, and set off his person, which was very comely, to the
greatest advantage, the king's daughter was mightily taken with his
appearance, and the marquis of Carabas had no sooner cast upon her two
or three respectful glances, then she became violently in love with him.
The king insisted on his getting into the carriage and taking a ride
with them. The cat, enchanted to see how well his scheme was likely to
succeed, ran before to a meadow that was reaping, and said to the
reapers: "Good people, if you do not tell the king, who will soon pass
this way, that the meadow you are reaping belongs to my lord marquis of
Carabas, you shall be chopped as small as mince meat." The king did not
fail to ask the reapers to whom the meadow belonged? "To my lord marquis
of Carabas," said they all at once; for the threats of the cat had
terribly frighted them. "You have here a very fine piece of land, my
lord marquis," said the king. "Truly, sire," replied he, "it does not
fail to bring me every year a plentiful harvest." The cat who still went
on before, now came to a field where some other labourers were making
sheaves of the corn they had reaped, to whom he said as before: "Good
people, if you do not tell the king who will presently pass this way,
that the corn you have reaped in this field belongs to my lord marquis
of Carabas, you shall be chopped as small as mince meat." The king
accordingly passed a moment after, and inquired to whom the corn he saw
belonged? "To my lord marquis of Carabas," answered they very glibly;
upon which the king again complimented the marquis upon his noble
possessions. The cat still continued to go before, and gave the same
charge to all the people he met with; so that the king was greatly
astonished at the splendid fortune of my lord marquis of Carabas. Puss
at length arrived at a stately castle, which belonged to an Ogre, the
richest ever known; for all the lands the king had passed through and
admired were his. The cat took care to learn every particular about the
Ogre, and what he could do, and then asked to speak with him, saying, as
he entered the room in which he was, that he could not pass so near his
castle without doing himself the honour to inquire after his health. The
Ogre received him as civilly as an Ogre could do, and desired him to be
seated, "I have been informed," said the cat, "that you have the gift of
changing yourself to all sorts of animals; into a lion or an elephant
for example." "It is very true," replied the Ogre somewhat sternly; "and
to convince you I will directly take the form of a lion." The cat was so
much terrified at finding himself so near to a lion, that he sprang from
him, and climbed to the roof of the house; but not without much
difficulty, as his boots were not very fit to walk upon the tiles.
Some minutes after, the cat perceiving that the Ogre had quitted the
form of a lion, ventured to come down from the tiles, and owned that he
had been a good deal frightened, "I have been further informed,"
continued the cat, "but I know not how to believe it, that you have the
power of taking the form of the smallest animals also; for example of
changing yourself to a rat or a mouse: I confess I should think this
impossible." "Impossible! you shall see;" and at the same instant he
changed himself into a mouse, and began to frisk about the room. The cat
no sooner cast his eyes upon the Ogre in this form, than he sprang upon
him and devoured him in an instant. In the meantime the king, admiring
as he came near it, the magnificent castle of the Ogre, ordered his
attendants to drive up to the gates, as he wished to take a nearer view
of it. The cat, hearing the noise of the carriage on the drawbridge,
immediately came out, saying: "Your majesty is welcome to the castle of
my lord marquis of Carabas." "And is this splendid castle yours also, my
lord marquis of Carabas? I never saw anything more stately than the
building, or more beautiful than the park and pleasure grounds around
it; no doubt the castle is no less magnificent within than without:
pray, my lord marquis, indulge me with a sight of it."
The marquis gave his hand to the young princess as she alighted, and
followed the king who went before; they entered a spacious hall, where
they found a splendid collation which the Ogre had prepared for some
friends he had that day expected to visit him; but who, hearing that the
king with the princess and a great gentleman of the court were within,
had not dared to enter. The king was so much charmed with the amiable
qualities and noble fortune of the marquis of Carabas, and the young
princess too had fallen so violently in love with him, that when the
king had partaken of the collation, and drunk a few glasses of wine, he
said to the marquis: "It will be you own fault, my lord marquis of
Carabas, if you do not soon become my son-in-law." The marquis received
the intelligence with a thousand respectful acknowledgments, accepted
the honour conferred upon him, and married the princess that very day.
The cat became a great lord, and never after ran after rats and mice but
for his amusement.
THE SLEEPING BEAUTY IN THE WOOD
Once upon a time there was a king and a queen who grieved sorely that
they had no children. When at last the queen gave birth to a daughter
the king was so overjoyed that he gave a great christening feast, the
like of which had never before been known. He asked all the fairies in
the land--there were seven all told--to stand godmothers to the little
princess, hoping that each might give her a gift, and so she should have
all imaginable perfections.
After the christening, all the company returned to the palace, where a
great feast had been spread for the fairy godmothers. Before each was
set a magnificent plate, with a gold knife and a gold fork studded with
diamonds and rubies. Just as they were seating themselves, however,
there entered an old fairy who had not been invited because more than
fifty years ago she had shut herself up in a tower and it was supposed
that she was either dead or enchanted.
The king ordered a cover to be laid for her, but it could not be a
massive gold one like the others, for only seven had been ordered made.
The old fairy thought herself ill-used and muttered between her teeth.
One of the young fairies, overhearing her, and fancying she might work
some mischief to the little baby, went and hid herself behind the
hangings in the hall, so as to be able to have the last word and undo
any harm the old fairy might wish to work. The fairies now began to
endow the princess. The youngest, for her gift, decreed that she should
be the most beautiful person in the world; the next that she should have
the mind of an angel; the third that she should be perfectly graceful;
the fourth that she should dance admirably well; the fifth, that she
should sing like a nightingale; the sixth, that she should play
charmingly upon every musical instrument. The turn of the old fairy had
now come, and she declared, while her head shook with malice, that the
princess should pierce her hand with a spindle and die of the wound.
This dreadful fate threw all the company into tears of dismay, when the
young fairy who had hidden herself came forward and said:
"Be of good cheer, king and queen; your daughter shall not so die. It is
true I cannot entirely undo what my elder has done. The princess will
pierce her hand with a spindle, but, instead of dying, she will only
fall into a deep sleep. The sleep will last a hundred years, and at the
end of that time a king's son will come to wake her."
The king, in hopes of preventing what the old fairy had foretold,
immediately issued an edict by which he forbade all persons in his
dominion from spinning or even having spindles in their houses under
pain of instant death.
Now fifteen years after the princess was born she was with the king and
queen at one of their castles, and as she was running about by herself
she came to a little chamber at the top of a tower, and there sat an
honest old woman spinning, for she had never heard of the king's edict.
"What are you doing?" asked the princess.
"I am spinning, my fair child," said the old woman, who did not know
"How pretty it is!" exclaimed the princess. "How do you do it? Give it
to me that I may see if I can do it." She had no sooner taken up the
spindle, than, being hasty and careless, she pierced her hand with the
point of it, and fainted away. The old woman, in great alarm, called for
help. People came running in from all sides; they threw water in the
princess's face and did all they could to restore her, but nothing would
bring her to. The king, who had heard the noise and confusion, came up
also, and remembering what the fairy had said, he had the princess
carried to the finest apartment and laid upon a richly embroidered bed.
She lay there in all her loveliness, for the swoon had not made her
pale; her lips were cherry-ripe and her cheeks ruddy and fair; her eyes
were closed, but they could hear her breathing quietly; she could not be
dead. The king looked sorrowfully upon her. He knew that she would not
awake for a hundred years.
The good fairy who had saved her life and turned her death into sleep
was in the kingdom of Mataquin, twelve thousand leagues away, when this
happened, but she learned of it from a dwarf who had a pair of
seven-league boots, and instantly set out for the castle, where she
arrived in an hour, drawn by dragons in a fiery chariot. The king came
forward to receive her and showed his grief. The good fairy was very
wise and saw that the princess when she woke would find herself all
alone in that great castle and everything about her would be strange. So
this is what she did. She touched with her wand everybody that was in
the castle, except the king and queen. She touched the governesses,
maids of honour, women of the bedchamber, gentlemen, officers,
stewards, cooks, scullions, boys, guards, porters, pages, footmen; she
touched the horses in the stable with their grooms, the great mastiffs
in the court-yard, and even little Pouste, the tiny lap-dog of the
princess that was on the bed beside her. As soon as she had touched them
they all fell asleep, not to wake again until the time arrived for their
mistress to do so, when they would be ready to wait upon her. Even the
spits before the fire, laden with partridges and pheasants, went to
sleep, and the fire itself went to sleep also.
It was the work of a moment. The king and queen kissed their daughter
farewell and left the castle, issuing a proclamation that no person
whatsoever was to approach it. That was needless, for in a quarter of an
hour there had grown up about it a wood so thick and filled with thorns
that nothing could get at the castle, and the castle top itself could
only be seen from a great distance.
A hundred years went by, and the kingdom was in the hands of another
royal family. The son of the king was hunting one day when he discovered
the towers of the castle above the tops of the trees, and asked what
castle that was. All manner of answers were given to him. One said it
was an enchanted castle, another that witches lived there, but most
believed that it was occupied by a great ogre which carried thither all
the children he could catch and ate them up one at a time, for nobody
could get at him through the wood. The prince did not know what to
believe, when finally an old peasant said:
"Prince, it is more than fifty years since I heard my father say that
there was in that castle the most beautiful princess that ever was seen;
that she was to sleep for a hundred years, and to be awakened at last by
the king's son, who was to marry her."
The young prince at these words felt himself on fire. He had not a
moment's doubt that he was destined to this great adventure, and full of
ardour he determined at once to set out for the castle. Scarcely had he
come to the wood when all the trees and thorns which had made such an
impenetrable thicket opened on one side and the other to offer him a
path. He walked toward the castle, which appeared now at the end of a
long avenue, but when he turned to, look for his followers not one was
to be seen; the woods had closed instantly upon him as he had passed
through. He was entirely alone, and utter silence was about him. He
entered a large forecourt and stood still with amazement and awe. On
every side were stretched the bodies of men and animals apparently
lifeless. But the faces of the men were rosy, and the goblets by them
had a few drops of wine left. The men had plainly fallen asleep. His
steps resounded as he passed over the marble pavement and up the marble
staircase. He entered the guard-room; there the guards stood drawn up in
line with carbines at their shoulders, but they were sound asleep. He
passed through one apartment after another, where were ladies and
gentlemen asleep in their chairs or standing. He entered a chamber
covered with gold, and saw on a bed, the curtains of which were drawn,
the most lovely sight he had ever looked upon--a princess, who appeared
to be about fifteen or sixteen, and so fair that she seemed to belong to
another world. He drew near, trembling and wondering, and knelt beside
her. Her hand lay upon her breast, and he touched his lips to it. At
that moment, the enchantment being ended, the princess awoke, and,
looking drowsily and tenderly at the young man, said:
"Have you come, my prince? I have waited long for you." The prince was
overjoyed at the words, and at the tender voice and look, and scarcely
knew how to speak. But he managed to assure her of his love, and they
soon forgot all else as they talked and talked. They talked for four
hours, and had not then said half that was in their heads to say.
Meanwhile all the rest of the people in the castle had been wakened at
the same moment as the princess, and they were now extremely hungry. The
lady-in-waiting became very impatient, and at length announced to the
princess that they all waited for her. Then the prince took the princess
by the hand; she was dressed in great splendour, but he did not hint
that she looked as he had seen pictures of his great-grandmother look;
he thought her all the more charming for that. They passed into a hall
of mirrors, where they supped, attended by the officers of the princess.
The violins and haut-boys played old but excellent pieces of music, and
after supper, to lose no time, the grand almoner married the royal
lovers in the chapel of the castle.
When they left the castle the next day to return to the prince's home,
they were followed by all the retinue of the princess. They marched down
the long avenue, and the wood opened again to let them pass. Outside
they met the prince's followers, who were overjoyed to see their master.
He turned to show them the castle, but behold! there was no castle to be
seen, and no wood; castle and wood had vanished, but the prince and
princess went gayly away, and when the old king and queen died they
reigned in their stead.
JACK AND THE BEAN-STALK
In the days of King Alfred, there lived a poor woman whose cottage was
situated in a remote country village, a great many miles from London.
She had been a widow some years, and had an only child named Jack, whom
she indulged to a fault. The consequence of her blind partiality was,
that Jack did not pay the least attention to any thing she said, but was
indolent, careless, and extravagant. His follies were not owing to a bad
disposition, but that his mother had never checked him. By degrees she
disposed of all she possessed--scarcely any thing remained but a cow.
The poor woman one day met Jack with tears in her eyes; her distress was
great, and for the first time in her life she could not help reproaching
him, saying, "Oh! you wicked child, by your ungrateful course of life
you have at last brought me to beggary and ruin. Cruel, cruel boy! I
have not money enough to purchase even a bit of bread for another
day--nothing now remains to sell but my poor cow! I am sorry to part
with her; it grieves me sadly, but we must not starve." For a few
minutes, Jack felt a degree of remorse, but it was soon over, and he
began teasing his mother to let him sell the cow at the next village, so
much, that she at last consented. As he was going along, he met a
butcher, who inquired why he was driving the cow from home? Jack
replied, he was going to sell it. The butcher held some curious beans in
his hat; they were of various colours, and attracted Jack's attention.
This did not pass unnoticed by the butcher, who, knowing Jack's easy
temper, thought now was the time to take an advantage of it; and
determined not to let slip so good an opportunity, asked what was the
price of the cow, offering at the same time all the beans in his hat for
her. The silly boy could not conceal the pleasure he felt at what he
supposed so great an offer, the bargain was struck instantly, and the
cow exchanged for a few paltry beans. Jack made the best of his way
home, calling aloud to his mother before he reached home, thinking to
surprise her.
When she saw the beans, and heard Jack's account, her patience quite
forsook her. She kicked the beans away in a passion--they flew in all
directions--some were scattered in the garden. Not having any thing to
eat, they both went supperless to bed. Jack woke early in the morning,
and seeing something uncommon from the window of his bedchamber, ran
down stairs into the garden, where he soon discovered that some of the
beans had taken root, and sprung up surprisingly: the stalks were of an
immense thickness, and had so entwined, that they formed a ladder nearly
like a chain in appearance. Looking upward, he could not discern the
top, it appeared to be lost in the clouds: he tried it, found it firm,
and not to be shaken. He quickly formed the resolution of endeavouring
to climb up to the top, in order to seek his fortune, and ran to
communicate his intention to his mother, not doubting but she would be
equally pleased with himself. She declared he should not go; said it
would break her heart if he did--entreated, and threatened--but all in
vain. Jack set out, and after climbing for some hours, reached the top
of the bean-stalk, fatigued and quite exhausted. Looking around, he
found himself in a strange country; it appeared to be a desert, quite
barren, not a tree, shrub, house, or living creature to be seen; here
and there were scattered fragments of stone; and at unequal distances,
small heaps of earth were loosely thrown together.
Jack seated himself pensively upon a block of stone, and thought of his
mother--he reflected with sorrow upon his disobedience in climbing the
bean-stalk against her will; and concluded that he must die with hunger.
However he walked on, hoping to see a house where he might beg something
to eat and drink; presently a handsome young woman appeared at a
distance: as she approached, Jack could not help admiring how beautiful
and lively she looked; she was dressed in the most elegant manner, and
had a small white wand in her hand, on the top of which was a peacock of
pure gold. While Jack was looking with great surprise at this charming
female, she came up to him, and with a smile of the most bewitching
sweetness, inquired how he came there. Jack related the circumstance of
the bean-stalk. She asked him if he recollected his father; he replied
he did not; and added, there must be some mystery relating to him,
because if he asked his mother who his father was, she always burst into
tears, and appeared violently agitated, nor did she recover herself for
some days after; one thing, however, he could not avoid observing upon
these occasions, which was that she always carefully avoided answering
him, and even seemed afraid of speaking, as if there was some secret
connected with his father's history which she must not disclose. The
young woman replied, "I will reveal the whole story; your mother must
not. But, before I begin, I require a solemn promise on your part to do
what I command; I am a fairy, and if you do not perform exactly what I
desire, you will be destroyed," Jack was frightened at her menaces, but
promised to fulfil her injunctions exactly, and the fairy thus addressed
him:
"Your father was a rich man, his disposition remarkably benevolent: he
was very good to the poor, and constantly relieving them. He made it a
rule never to let a day pass without doing good to some person. On one
particular day in the week, he kept open house, and invited only those
who were reduced and had lived well. He always presided himself, and did
all in his power to render his guests comfortable; the rich and the
great were not invited. The servants were all happy, and greatly
attached to their master and mistress. Your father, though only a
private gentleman, was as rich as a prince, and he deserved all he
possessed, for he only lived to do good. Such a man was soon known and
talked of. A giant lived a great many miles off: this man was altogether
as wicked as your father was good; he was in his heart envious,
covetous, and cruel; but he had the art of concealing those vices. He
was poor, and wished to enrich himself at any rate. Hearing your father
spoken of, he formed the design of becoming acquainted with him, hoping
to ingratiate himself into your father's favour. He removed quickly into
your neighbourhood, caused to be reported that he was a gentleman who
had just lost all he possessed by an earth-quake, and found it difficult
to escape with his life; his wife was with him. Your father gave credit
to his story, and pitied him, gave him handsome apartments in his own
house, and caused him and his wife to be treated like visitors of
consequence, little imagining that the giant was meditating a horrid
return for all his favours.
"Things went on in this way for some time, the giant becoming daily more
impatient to put his plan into execution; at last a favourable
opportunity presented itself. Your father's house was at some distance
from the seashore, but with a glass the coast could be seen distinctly.
The giant was one day using the telescope; the wind was very high; he
saw a fleet of ships in distress off the rocks; he hastened to your
father, mentioned the circumstance, and eagerly requested he would send
all the servants he could spare to relieve the sufferers. Every one was
instantly despatched, except the porter and your nurse; the giant then
joined your father in the study, and appeared to be delighted--he really
was so. Your father recommended a favourite book, and was handing it
down: the giant took the opportunity, and stabbed him; he instantly fell
down dead. The giant left the body, found the porter and nurse, and
presently despatched them; being determined to have no living witnesses
of his crimes. You were then only three months old; your mother had you
in her arms in a remote part of the house, and was ignorant of what was
going on; she went into the study, but how was she shocked, on
discovering your father a corpse, and weltering in his blood! she was
stupefied with horror and grief, and was motionless. The giant, who was
seeking her, found her in that state, and hastened to serve her and you
as he had done her husband, but she fell at his feet, and in a pathetic
manner besought him to spare your life and hers.
"Remorse, for a moment, seemed to touch the barbarian's heart: he
granted your lives; but first he made her take a most solemn oath, never
to inform you who your father was, or to answer any questions concerning
him: assuring her that if she did, he would certainly discover her, and
put both of you to death in the most cruel manner. Your mother took you
in her arms, and fled as quickly as possible; she was scarcely gone when
the giant repented that he had suffered her to escape. He would have
pursued her instantly; but he had to provide for his own safety; as it
was necessary he should be gone before the servants returned. Having
gained your father's confidence, he knew where to find all his treasure:
he soon loaded himself and his wife, set the house on fire in several
places, and when the servants returned, the house was burned quite down
to the ground. Your poor mother, forlorn, abandoned, and forsaken,
wandered with you a great many miles from this scene of desolation. Fear
added to her haste. She settled in the cottage where you were brought
up, and it was entirety owing to her fear of the giant that she never
mentioned your father to you. I became your father's guardian at his
birth; but fairies have laws to which they are subject as well as
mortals. A short time before the giant went to your father's, I
transgressed; my punishment was a suspension of power for a limited
time--an unfortunate circumstance, as it totally prevented my succouring
your father.
"The day on which you met the butcher, as you went to sell your mother's
cow, my power was restored. It was I who secretly prompted you to take
the beans in exchange for the cow. By my power, the bean-stalk grew to
so great a height, and formed a ladder. I need not add that I inspired
you with a strong desire to ascend the ladder. The giant lives in this
country: you are the person appointed to punish him for all his
wickedness. You will have dangers and difficulties to encounter, but you
must persevere in avenging the death of your father, or you will not
prosper in any of your undertakings, but will always be miserable. As to
the giant's possessions, you may seize on all you can; for every thing
he has is yours, though now you are unjustly deprived of it. One thing I
desire--do not let your mother know you are acquainted with your
father's history, till you see me again. Go along the direct road, you
will soon see the house where your cruel enemy lives. While you do as I
order you, I will protect and guard you; but, remember, if you dare
disobey my commands, a most dreadful punishment awaits you."
When the fairy had concluded, she disappeared, leaving Jack to pursue
his journey. He walked on till after sunset, when, to his great joy, he
espied a large mansion. This agreeable sight revived his drooping
spirits; he redoubled his speed, and soon reached it. A plain-looking
woman was at the door--he accosted her, begging she would give him a
morsel of bread and a night's lodging. She expressed the greatest
surprise at seeing him; and said it was quite uncommon to see a human
being near their house, for it was well known that her husband was a
large and very powerful giant, and that he would never eat any thing but
human flesh, if he could possibly get it; that he did not think any
thing of walking fifty miles to procure it, usually being out the whole
day for that purpose.
This account greatly terrified Jack, but still he hoped to elude the
giant, and therefore he again entreated the woman to take him in for one
night only, and hide him where she thought proper. The good woman at
last suffered herself to be persuaded, for she was of a compassionate
and generous disposition, and took him into the house. First, they
entered a fine large hall, magnificently furnished; they then passed
through several spacious rooms, all in the same style of grandeur; but
they appeared to be quite forsaken and desolate. A long gallery was
next; it was very dark--just light enough to show that, instead of a
wall on one side, there was a grating of iron, which parted off a dismal
dungeon, from whence issued the groans of those poor victims whom the
cruel giant reserved in confinement for his own voracious appetite. Poor
Jack was half dead with fear, and would have given the world to have
been with his mother again, for he now began to fear that he should
never see her more, and gave himself up for lost; he even mistrusted the
good woman, and thought she had let him into the house for no other
purpose than to lock him up among the unfortunate people in the dungeon.
At the farther end of the gallery there was a spacious kitchen, and a
very excellent fire was burning in the grate. The good woman bid Jack
sit down, and gave him plenty to eat and drink. Jack, not seeing any
thing here to make him uncomfortable, soon forgot his fear, and was just
beginning to enjoy himself, when he was aroused by a loud knocking at
the street-door, which made the whole house shake: the giant's wife ran
to secure him in the oven, and then went to let her husband in. Jack
heard him accost her in a voice like thunder, saying: "Wife, I smell
fresh meat." "Oh! my dear," replied she, "it is nothing but the people
in the dungeon." The giant appeared to believe her, and walked into the
very kitchen where poor Jack was concealed, who shook, trembled, and was
more terrified than he had yet been. At last, the monster seated himself
quietly by the fire-side, whilst his wife prepared supper. By degrees
Jack recovered himself sufficiently to look at the giant through a small
crevice. He was quite astonished to see what an amazing quantity he
devoured, and thought he never would have done eating and drinking. When
supper was ended, the giant desired his wife to bring him his hen. A
very beautiful hen was then brought, and placed on the table before him.
Jack's curiosity was very great to see what would happen: he observed
that every time the giant said "Lay!" the hen laid an egg of solid gold.
The giant amused himself a long time with his hen; meanwhile his wife
went to bed. At length the giant fell asleep by the fire-side, and
snored like the roaring of a cannon.
At daybreak, Jack, finding the giant still asleep, and not likely to
awaken soon, crept softly out of his hiding-place, seized the hen, and
ran off with her. He met with some difficulty in finding his way out of
the house, but at last he reached the road with safety. He easily found
the way to the bean-stalk, and descended it better and quicker than he
expected. His mother was overjoyed to see him; he found her crying
bitterly, and lamenting his hard fate, for she concluded he had come to
some shocking end through his rashness. Jack was impatient to show his
hen, and inform his mother how valuable it was. "And now, mother," said
Jack, "I have brought home that which will quickly make us rich; and I
hope to make you some amends for the affliction I have caused you
through my idleness, extravagance, and folly." The hen produced as many
golden eggs as they desired: they sold them, and in a little time became
possessed of as much riches as they wanted. For some months Jack and his
mother lived very happily together; but he being very desirous of
travelling, recollecting the fairy's commands, and fearing that if he
delayed, she would put her threats into execution, longed to climb the
bean-stalk, and pay the giant another visit, in order to carry away some
more of his treasures; for, during the time that Jack was in the giant's
mansion, whilst he lay concealed in the oven, he learned from the
conversation that took place between the giant and his wife, that he
possessed some wonderful curiosities. Jack thought of his journey again
and again, but still he could not summon resolution enough to break it
to his mother, being well assured that she would endeavour to prevent
his going. However, one day he told her boldly that he must take a
journey up the bean-stalk; she begged and prayed him not to think of it,
and tried all in her power to dissuade him: she told him that the
giant's wife would certainly know him again, and that the giant would
desire nothing better than to get him into his power, that he might put
him to a cruel death, in order to be revenged for the loss of his hen.
Jack, finding that all his arguments were useless, pretended to give up
the point, though resolved to go at all events. He had a dress prepared
which would disguise him, and something to colour his skin. He thought
it impossible for any one to recollect him in this dress.
In a few mornings after this, he arose very early, changed his
complexion, and, unperceived by any one, climbed the bean-stalk a second
time. He was greatly fatigued when he reached the top, and very hungry.
Having rested some time on one of the stones, he pursued his journey to
the giant's mansion. He reached it late in the evening: the woman was at
the door as before. Jack addressed her, at the same time telling her a
pitiful tale, and requesting that she would give him some victuals and
drink, and also a night's lodging.
She told him (what he knew before very well) about her husband being a
powerful and cruel giant; and also that she one night admitted a poor,
hungry, friendless boy, who was half dead with travelling; that the
little ungrateful fellow had stolen one of the giant's treasures; and,
ever since that, her husband had been worse than before, used her very
cruelly, and continually upbraided her with being the cause of his
misfortune. Jack was at no loss to discover that he was attending to the
account of a story in which he was the principal actor. He did his best
to persuade the good woman to admit him, but found it a very hard task.
At last she consented; and as she led the way, Jack observed that every
thing was just as he had found it before. She took him into the kitchen,
and after he had done eating and drinking, she hid him in an old
lumber-closet. The giant returned at the usual time, and walked in so
heavily, that the house was shaken to its foundation. He seated himself
by the fire, and soon after exclaimed: "Wife! I smell fresh meat!" The
wife replied, it was the crows, who had brought a piece of raw meat, and
left it on the top of the house. Whilst supper was preparing, the giant
was very ill-tempered and impatient, frequently lifting up his hand to
strike his wife, for not being quick enough; she, however, was always so
fortunate as to elude the blow. He was also continually up-braiding her
with the loss of his wonderful hen. The giant at last having ended his
voracious supper, and eaten till he was quite satisfied, said to his
wife: "I must have something to amuse me; either my bags of money or my
harp." After a great deal of ill-humour, and having teased his wife some
he commanded her to bring down his bags of gold and silver. Jack, as
before, peeped out of his hiding-place, and presently his wife brought
two bags into the room: they were of a very large size; one was filled
with new guineas, and the other with new shillings. They were both
placed before the giant, who began reprimanding his poor wife most
severely for staying so long; she replied, trembling with fear, that
they were so heavy, that she could scarcely lift them; and concluded, at
last, that she would never again bring them down stairs; adding, that
she had nearly fainted, owing to their weight This so exasperated the
giant, that he raised his hand to strike her; she, however, escaped, and
went to bed, leaving him to count over his treasure, by way of
amusement. The giant took his bags, and after turning them over and
over, to see that they were in the same state as he left them, began to
count their contents. First, the bag which contained the silver was
emptied, and the contents placed upon the table. Jack viewed the
glittering heaps with delight, and most heartily wished them in his own
possession. The giant (little thinking he was so narrowly watched)
reckoned the silver over several times; and then, having satisfied
himself that all was safe, put it into the bag again, which he made very
secure. The other bag was opened next, and the guineas placed upon the
table. If Jack was pleased at the sight of the silver, how much more
delighted he felt when he saw such a heap of glittering gold! He even
had the boldness to think of gaming both bags; but suddenly recollecting
himself, he began to fear that the giant would sham sleep, the better to
entrap any one who might be concealed. When the giant had counted over
the gold till he was tired, he put it up, if possible, more secure than
he had put up the silver before; he then fell back on his chair by the
fire-side, and fell asleep. He snored so loud, that Jack compared his
noise to the roaring of the sea in a high wind, when the tide is coming
in. At last, Jack concluded him to be asleep, and therefore secure,
stole out of his hiding-place, and approached the giant, in order to
carry off the two bags of money; but just as he laid his hand upon one
of the bags, a little dog, whom he had not perceived before, started
from under the giant's chair, and barked at Jack most furiously, who now
gave himself up for lost. Fear riveted him to the spot. Instead of
endeavouring to escape, he stood still, though expecting his enemy to
awake every instant. Contrary, however, to his expectation, the giant
continued in a sound sleep, and the dog grew weary of barking. Jack now
began to recollect himself, and on looking round, saw a large piece of
meat; this he threw to the dog, who instantly seized it, and took it
into the lumber-closet, which Jack had just left. Finding himself
delivered from a noisy and troublesome enemy, and seeing the giant did
not awake, Jack boldly seized the bags, and throwing them over his
shoulders, ran out of the kitchen. He reached the street door in safety,
and found it quite daylight. In his way to the top of the bean-stalk, he
found himself greatly incommoded with the weight of the money-bags; and
really they were so heavy that he could scarcely carry them. Jack was
overjoyed when he found himself near the bean-stalk; he soon reached the
bottom, and immediately ran to seek his mother; to his great surprise,
the cottage was deserted; he ran from one room to another, without being
able to find any one; he then hastened into the village, hoping to see
some of the neighbours, who could inform him where he could find his
mother. An old woman at last directed him to a neighbouring house, where
she was ill of a fever. He was greatly shocked on finding her apparently
dying, and could scarcely bear his own reflections, on knowing himself
to be the cause. On being informed of our hero's safe return, his
mother, by degrees, revived, and gradually recovered. Jack presented her
with his two valuable bags. They lived happily and comfortably; the
cottage was rebuilt, and well furnished.
For three years Jack heard no more of the bean-stalk, but he could not
forget it; though he feared making his mother unhappy. She would not
mention the hated bean-stalk, lest it should remind him of taking
another journey. Notwithstanding the comforts Jack enjoyed at home, his
mind dwelt continually upon the bean-stalk; for the fairy's menaces, in
case of his disobedience, were ever present to his mind, and prevented
him from being happy; he could think of nothing else. It was in vain
endeavouring to amuse himself; he became thoughtful, and would arise at
the first dawn of day, and view the bean-stalk for hours together. His
mother saw that something preyed heavily upon his mind, and endeavoured
to discover the cause; but Jack knew too well what the consequence would
be, should she succeed. He did his utmost, therefore, to conquer the
great desire he had for another journey up the bean-stalk. Finding,
however, that his inclination grew too powerful for him, he began to
make secret preparations for his journey, and on the longest day, arose
as soon as it was light, ascended the bean-stalk, and reached the top
with some little trouble. He found the road, journey, etc., much as it
was on the two former times; he arrived at the giant's mansion in the
evening, and found his wife standing, as usual, at the door. Jack had
disguised himself so completely, that she did not appear to have the
least recollection of him; however, when he pleaded hunger and poverty,
in order to gain admittance, he found it very difficult to persuade her.
At last he prevailed, and was concealed in the copper. When the giant
returned, he said, "I smell fresh meat!" But Jack felt quite composed,
as he had said so before, and had been soon satisfied. However, the
giant started up suddenly, and, notwithstanding all his wife could say,
he searched all round the room. Whilst this was going forward, Jack was
exceedingly terrified, and ready to die with fear, wishing himself at
home a thousand times; but when the giant approached the copper, and put
his hand upon the lid, Jack thought his death was certain. The giant
ended his search there, without moving the lid, and seated himself
quietly by the fire-side. This fright nearly overcame poor Jack; he was
afraid of moving or even breathing, lest he should be discovered. The
giant at last ate a hearty supper. When he had finished, he commanded
his wife to fetch down his harp. Jack peeped under the copper-lid, and
soon saw the most beautiful harp that could be imagined: it was placed
by the giant on the table, who said, "Play!" and it instantly played of
its own accord, without being touched. The music was uncommonly fine.
Jack was delighted, and felt more anxious to get the harp into his
possession, than either of the former treasures. The giant's soul was
not attuned to harmony, and the music soon lulled him into a sound
sleep. Now, therefore, was the time to carry off the harp, as the giant
appeared to be in a more profound sleep than usual Jack soon determined,
got out of the copper, and seized the harp, The harp was enchanted by a
fairy: it called out loudly: "Master! master!" The giant awoke, stood
up, and tried to pursue Jack; but he had drank so much, that he could
hardly stand. Poor Jack ran as fast as he could. In a little time the
giant recovered sufficiently to walk slowly, or rather, to reel after
him. Had he been sober, he must have overtaken Jack instantly; but, as
he then was, Jack contrived to be first at the top of the bean-stalk.
The giant called after him in a voice like thunder, and sometimes was
very near him. The moment Jack got down the bean-stalk he called out for
a hatchet; one was brought him directly; just at that instant, the giant
was beginning to descend; but Jack, with his hatchet, cut the bean-stalk
close off at the root, which made the giant fall headlong into the
garden: the fall killed him, thereby releasing the world from a
barbarous enemy. Jack's mother was delighted when she saw the bean-stalk
destroyed. At this instant the fairy appeared: she first addressed
Jack's mother and explained every circumstance relating to the journeys
up the bean-stalk. The fairy charged Jack to be dutiful to his mother,
and to follow his father's good example, which was the only way to be
happy. She then disappeared. Jack heartily begged his mother's pardon
for all the sorrow and affliction he had caused her, promising most
faithfully to be very dutiful and obedient to her for the future.
JACK THE GIANT KILLER
In the reign of the famous King Arthur, there lived near the Land's End
of England, in the county of Cornwall, a worthy farmer, who had an only
son named Jack. Jack was a boy of a bold temper; he took pleasure in
hearing or reading stories of wizards, conjurers, giants, and fairies,
and used to listen eagerly while his father talked of the great deeds of
the brave knights of King Arthur's Round Table. When Jack was sent to
take care of the sheep and oxen in the fields, he used to amuse himself
with planning battles, sieges, and the means to conquer or surprise a
foe. He was above the common sports of children; but hardly any one
could equal him at wrestling; or, if he met with a match for himself in
strength, his skill and address always made him the victor. In those
days there lived on St. Michael's Mount of Cornwall, which rises out of
the sea at some distance from the main land, a huge giant. He was
eighteen feet high, and three yards round; and his fierce and savage
looks were the terror of all his neighbours. He dwelt in a gloomy cavern
on the very top of the mountain, and used to wade over to the main land
in search of his prey. When he came near, the people left their houses;
and after he had glutted his appetite upon their cattle, he would throw
half-a-dozen oxen upon his back, and tie three times as many sheep and
hogs round his waist, and so march back to his own abode. The giant had
done this for many years, and the coast of Cornwall was greatly hurt by
his thefts, when Jack boldly resolved to destroy him. He therefore took
a horn, a shovel, pickaxe, and a dark lantern, and early in a long
winter's evening he swam to the mount. There he fell to work at once,
and before morning he had dug a pit twenty-two feet deep, and almost as
many broad. He covered it over with sticks and straw, and strewed some
of the earth over them, to make it look just like solid ground. He then
put his horn to his mouth, and blew such a loud and long tantivy, that
the giant awoke and came towards Jack, roaring like thunder: "You saucy
villain, you shall pay dearly for breaking my rest; I will broil you for
my breakfast." He had scarcely spoken these words, when he came
advancing one step farther; but then he tumbled headlong into the pit,
and his fall shook the very mountain. "O ho, Mr. Giant!" said Jack,
looking into the pit, "have you found your way so soon to the bottom?
How is your appetite now? Will nothing serve you for breakfast this cold
morning but broiling poor Jack?" The giant now tried to rise, but Jack
struck him a blow on the crown of the head with his pickaxe, which
killed him at once. Jack then made haste back to rejoice his friends
with the news of the giant's death. When the justices of Cornwall heard
of this valiant action, they sent for Jack, and declared that he should
always be called Jack the Giant Killer; and they also gave him a sword
and belt, upon which was written in letters of gold:
  "This is the valiant Cornishman
   Who slew the Giant Cormoran."
The news of Jack's exploits soon spread over the western parts of
England; and another giant, called Old Blunderbore, vowed to have
revenge on Jack, if it should ever be his fortune to get him into his
power. This giant kept an enchanted castle in the midst of a lonely
wood. About four months after the death of Cormoran, as Jack was taking
a journey into Wales, he passed through this wood; and as he was very
weary, he sat down to rest by the side of a pleasant fountain, and there
he fell into a deep sleep. The giant came to the fountain for water just
at this time, and found Jack there; and as the lines on Jack's belt
showed who he was, the giant lifted him up and laid him gently upon his
shoulder to carry him to his castle: but as he passed through the
thicket, the rustling of the leaves waked Jack; and he was sadly afraid
when he found himself in the clutches of Blunderbore. Yet this was
nothing to his fright soon after; for when they reached the castle, he
beheld the floor covered all over with the skulls and bones of men and
women. The giant took him into a large room where lay the hearts and
limbs of persons who had been lately killed; and he told Jack, with a
horrid grin, that men's hearts, eaten with pepper and vinegar, were his
nicest food; and also, that he thought he should make a dainty meal on
his heart. When he had said this, he locked Jack up in that room, while
he went to fetch another giant who lived in the same wood, to enjoy a
dinner off Jack's flesh with him. While he was away, Jack heard dreadful
shrieks, groans, and cries, from many parts of the castle; and soon
after he heard a mournful voice repeat these lines:
  "Haste, valiant stranger, haste away,
   Lest you become the giant's prey.
   On his return he'll bring another,
   Still more savage than his brother:
   A horrid, cruel monster, who,
   Before he kills, will torture you.
   Oh valiant stranger, haste away,
   Or you'll become these giants' prey."
This warning was so shocking to poor Jack, that he was ready to go mad.
He ran to the window, and saw the two giants coming along arm in arm.
This window was right over the gates of the castle. "Now," thought Jack,
"either my death or freedom is at hand." There were two strong cords in
the room: Jack made a large noose with a slip-knot at the ends of both
these, and as the giants were coming through the gates, he threw the
ropes over their heads. He then made the other ends fast to a beam in
the ceiling, and pulled with all his might till he had almost strangled
them. When he saw that they were both quite black in the face, and had
not the least strength left, he drew his sword, and slid down the ropes;
he then killed the giants, and thus saved himself from the cruel death
they meant to put him to. Jack next took a great bunch of keys from the
pocket of Blunderbore, and went into the castle again. He made a strict
search through all the rooms; and in them found three ladies tied up by
the hair of their heads, and almost starved to death. They told him that
their husbands had been killed by the giants, who had then condemned
them to be starved to death, because they would not eat the flesh of
their own dead husbands. "Ladies," said Jack, "I have put an end to the
monster and his wicked brother; and I give you this castle and all the
riches it contains, to make you some amends for the dreadful pains you
have felt." He then very politely gave them the keys of the castle, and
went further on his journey to Wales. As Jack had not taken any of the
giant's riches for himself, and so had very little money of his own, he
thought it best to travel as fast as he could. At length he lost his
way, and when night came on he was in a lonely valley between two lofty
mountains, where he walked about for some hours without seeing any
dwelling place, so he thought himself very lucky at last, in finding a
large and handsome house.
He went up to it boldly, and knocked loudly at the gate, when, to his
great terror and surprise, there came forth a monstrous giant with two
heads. He spoke to Jack very civilly, for he was a Welsh giant, and all
the mischief he did was by private and secret malice, under the show of
friendship and kindness. Jack told him that he was a traveller who had
lost his way, on which the huge monster made him welcome, and led him
into a room, where there was a good bed to pass the night in. Jack took
off his clothes quickly; but though he was so weary he could not go to
sleep. Soon after this he heard the giant walking backward and forward
in the next room, and saying to himself:
  "Though here you lodge with me this night,
   You shall not see the morning light;
   My club shall dash your brains out quite."
"Say you so?" thought Jack; "are these your tricks upon travellers? But
I hope to prove as cunning as you." Then getting out of bed, he groped
about the room, and at last found a large thick billet of wood; he laid
it in his own place in the bed, and then hid himself in a dark corner of
the room. In the middle of the night the giant came with his great club,
and struck many heavy blows on the bed, in the very place where Jack had
laid the billet, and then he went back to his own room, thinking he had
broken all his bones. Early in the morning, Jack put a bold face upon
the matter, and walked into the giant's room to thank him for his
lodgings. The giant started when he saw him, and he began to stammer
out, "Oh, dear me! Is it you? Pray, how did you sleep last night? Did
you hear or see any thing in the dead of the night?" "Nothing worth
speaking of," said Jack carelessly; "a rat, I believe, gave me three or
four slaps with his tail, and disturbed me a little; but I soon went to
sleep again." The giant wondered more and more at this; yet he did not
answer a word, but went to bring two great bowls of hasty-pudding for
their breakfast. Jack wished to make the giant believe that he could eat
as much as himself. So he contrived to button a leathern bag inside his
coat, and slipped the hasty-pudding into this bag, while he seemed to
put it into his mouth. When breakfast was over, he said to the giant:
"Now I will show you a fine trick; I can cure all wounds with a touch; I
could cut off my head one minute, and the next, put it sound again on my
shoulders: you shall see an example." He then took hold of the knife,
ripped up the leathern bag, and all the hasty-pudding tumbled out upon
the floor. "Ods splutter hur nails," cried the Welsh giant, who was
ashamed to be outdone by such a little fellow as Jack, "hur can do that
hurself." So he snatched up the knife, plunged it into his stomach, and
in a moment dropped down dead.
As soon as Jack had thus tricked the Welsh monster, he went farther on
his journey; and a few days after he met with King Arthur's only son,
who had got his father's leave to travel into Wales, to deliver a
beautiful lady from the power of a wicked magician, who held her in his
enchantments. When Jack found that the young prince had no servants with
him, he begged leave to attend him; and the prince at once agreed to
this, and gave Jack many thanks for his kindness. The prince was a
handsome, polite, and brave knight, and so good-natured that he gave
money to every body he met. At length he gave his last penny to an old
woman, and then turned to Jack, and said: "How shall we be able to get
food for ourselves the rest of our journey?" "Leave that to me sir,"
said Jack; "I will provide for my prince." Night now came on, and the
prince began to grow uneasy at thinking where they should lodge. "Sir,"
said Jack, "be of good heart; two miles farther there lives a large
giant, whom I know well. He has three heads, and will fight five hundred
men, and make them fly before him." "Alas!" replied the king's son, "we
had better never have been born than meet with such a monster." "My
lord, leave me to manage him, and wait here in quiet till I return." The
prince now staid behind, while Jack rode on full speed. And when he came
to the gates of the castle, he gave a loud knock. The giant, with a
voice like thunder, roared out: "Who is there?" And Jack made answer,
and said: "No one but your poor cousin Jack." "Well," said the giant,
"what news, cousin Jack?" "Dear uncle," said Jack, "I have some heavy
news." "Pooh!" said the giant, "what heavy news can come to me? I am a
giant with three heads; and can fight five hundred men, and make them
fly before me." "Alas!" said Jack, "Here is the king's son, coming with
two thousand men, to kill you, and to destroy the castle and all that
you have." "Oh, cousin Jack," said the giant, "This is heavy news
indeed! But I have a large cellar under ground, where I will hide
myself, and you shall lock, and bar me in, and keep the keys till the
king's son is gone."
Now when Jack had made the giant fast in the vault, he went back and
fetched the prince to the castle; they both made themselves merry with
the wine and other dainties that were in the house. So that night they
rested very pleasantly, while the poor giant lay trembling and shaking
with fear in the cellar under ground. Early in the morning, Jack gave
the king's son gold and silver out of the giant's treasure, and set him
three miles forward on his journey. He then went to let his uncle out of
the hole, who asked Jack what he should give him as a reward for saving
his castle. "Why, good uncle," said Jack, "I desire nothing but the old
coat and cap, with the old rusty sword and slippers, which are hanging
at your bed's head," Then said the giant: "You shall have them; and pray
keep them for my sake, for they are things of great use: the coat will
keep you invisible, the cap will give you knowledge, the sword cut
through anything, and the shoes are of vast swiftness; these may be
useful to you in all times of danger, so take them with all my heart."
Jack gave many thanks to the giant, and then set off to the prince. When
he had come up with the king's son, they soon arrived at the dwelling of
the beautiful lady, who was under the power of a wicked magician. She
received the prince very politely, and made a noble feast for him; and
when it was ended, she rose, and wiping her mouth with a fine
handkerchief, said: "My lord, you must submit to the custom of my
palace; to-morrow morning I command you to tell me on whom I bestow this
handkerchief or lose your head." She then went out of the room. The
young prince went to bed very mournful: but Jack put on his cap of
knowledge, which told him that the lady was forced, by the power of
enchantment, to meet the wicked magician every night in the middle of
the forest. Jack now put on his coat of darkness, and his shoes of
swiftness, and was there before her. When the lady came, she gave the
handkerchief to the magician. Jack with his sword of sharpness, at one
blow, cut off his head; the enchantment was then ended in a moment, and
the lady was restored to her former virtue and goodness.
She was married to the prince on the next day, and soon after went back
with her royal husband, and a great company, to the court of King
Arthur, where they were received with loud and joyful welcomes; and the
valiant hero Jack, for the many great exploits he had done for the good
of his country, was made one of the Knights of the Round Table. As Jack
had been so lucky in all his adventures, he resolved not to be idle for
the future, but still to do what services he could for the honour of the
king and the nation. He therefore humbly begged his majesty to furnish
him with a horse and money, that he might travel in search of new and
strange exploits. "For," said he to the king, "there are many giants yet
living in the remote parts of Wales, to the great terror and distress of
your majesty's subjects; therefore if it please you, sire, to favour me
in my design, I will soon rid your kingdom of these giants and monsters
in human shape." Now when the king heard this offer, and began to think
of the cruel deeds of these blood-thirsty giants and savage monsters, he
gave Jack every thing proper for such a journey. After this Jack took
leave of the king, the prince, and all the knights, and set off; taking
with him his cap of knowledge, his sword of sharpness, his shoes of
swiftness, and his invisible coat, the better to perform the great
exploits that might fall in his way. He went along over high hills and
lofty mountains, and on the third day he came to a large wide forest,
through which his road led. He had hardly entered the forest, when on a
sudden he heard very dreadful shrieks and cries. He forced his way
through the trees, and saw a monstrous giant dragging along by the hair
of their heads a handsome knight and his beautiful lady. Their tears and
cries melted the heart of honest Jack to pity and compassion; he
alighted from his horse, and tying him to an oak tree he put on his
invisible coat, under which he carried his sword of sharpness.
When he came up to the giant, he made several strokes at him, but could
not reach his body, on account of the enormous height of the terrible
creature, but he wounded his thighs in several places; and at length,
putting both hands to his sword, and aiming with all his might, he cut
off both the giant's legs just below the garter; and the trunk of his
body tumbling to the ground, made not only the trees shake, but the
earth itself tremble with the force of his fall. Then Jack, setting his
foot upon his neck, exclaimed, "Thou barbarous and savage wretch, behold
I come to execute upon thee the just reward for all thy crimes;" and
instantly plunged his sword into the giant's body. The huge monster gave
a hideous groan, and yielded up his life into the hands of the
victorious Jack the Giant Killer, whilst the noble knight and the
virtuous lady were both joyful spectators of his sudden death and their
deliverance. The courteous knight and his fair lady, not only returned
Jack hearty thanks for their deliverance, but also invited him to their
house, to refresh himself after his dreadful encounter, as likewise to
receive a reward for his good services. "No," said Jack, "I cannot be at
ease till I find out the den that was the monster's habitation." The
knight on hearing this grew very sorrowful, and replied, "Noble
stranger, it is too much to run a second hazard; this monster lived in a
den under yonder mountain, with a brother of his, more fierce and cruel
than himself; therefore, if you should go thither, and perish in the
attempt, it would be a heart-breaking thing to me and my lady; so let me
persuade you to go with us, and desist from any farther pursuit." "Nay,"
answered Jack, "if there be another, even if there were twenty, I would
shed the last drop of blood in my body before one of them should escape
my fury. When I have finished this task, I will come and pay my respects
to you." So when they had told him where to find them again, he got on
his horse and went after the dead giant's brother.
Jack had not rode a mile and a half, before he came in sight of the
mouth of the cavern; and nigh the entrance of it, he saw the other giant
sitting on a huge block of fine timber, with a knotted iron club lying
by his side, waiting for his brother. His eyes looked like flames of
fire, his face was grim and ugly, and his cheeks seemed like two
flitches of bacon; the bristles of his beard seemed to be thick rods of
iron wire; and his long locks of hair hung down upon his broad shoulders
like curling snakes. Jack got down from his horse, and turned him into a
thicket; then he put on his coat of darkness, and drew a little nearer
to behold this figure, and said softly: "Oh, monster! are you there? It
will not be long before I shall take you fast by the beard." The giant
all this while, could not see him, by reason of his invisible coat: so
Jack came quite close to him, and struck a blow at his head with his
sword of sharpness, but he missed his aim, and only cut off his nose,
which made him roar like loud claps of thunder. And though he rolled his
glaring eyes round on every side, he could not see who had given him the
blow; yet he took up his iron club, and began to lay about him like one
that was mad with pain and fury.
"Nay," said Jack, "if this be the case I will kill you at once." So
saying, he slipped nimbly behind him, and jumping upon the block of
timber, as the giant rose from it, he stabbed him in the back; when,
after a few howls, he dropped down dead. Jack cut off his head, and sent
it with the head of his brother, whom he had killed before in the
forest, to King Arthur, by a wagon which he hired for that purpose, with
an account of all his exploits. When Jack had thus killed these two
monsters, he went into their cave in search of their treasure: he passed
through many turnings and windings, which led him to a room paved with
freestone; at the end of it was a boiling caldron, and on the right hand
stood a large table where the giants used to dine. He then came to a
window that was secured with iron bars, through which he saw a number of
wretched captives, who cried out when they saw Jack, "Alas! alas! young
man, you are come to be one among us in this horrid den." "I hope," said
Jack, "you will not stay here long; but pray tell me what is the meaning
of your being here at all?" "Alas!" said one poor old man, "I will tell
you, sir. We are persons that have been taken by the giants who hold
this cave, and are kept till they choose to have a feast, then one of us
is to be killed, and cooked to please their taste. It is not long since
they took three for the same purpose." "Well," said Jack, "I have given
them such a dinner that it will be long enough before they have any
more." The captives were amazed at his words. "You may believe me," said
Jack; "for I have killed them both with the edge of the sword, and have
sent their large heads to the court of King Arthur, as marks of my great
success."
To show them that what he said was true, he unlocked the gate, and set
them all free. Then he led them to the great room, placed them round the
table, and set before them two quarters of beef, with bread and wine;
upon which they feasted to their fill. When supper was over, they
searched the giants' coffers, and Jack shared the store in them among
the captives, who thanked him for their escape. The next morning they
set off to their homes, and Jack to the knight's house, whom he had left
with his lady not long before. It was just at the time of sunrise that
Jack mounted his horse to proceed on his journey.
He arrived at the knight's house, where he was received with the
greatest joy by the thankful knight and his lady, who, in honour of
Jack's exploits, gave a grand feast, to which all the nobles and gentry
were invited. When the company were assembled, the knight declared to
them the great actions of Jack, and gave him, as a mark of respect, a
fine ring, on which was engraved the picture of the giant dragging the
knight and the lady by the hair, with this motto round it:
  "Behold, in dire distress were we,
    Under a giant's fierce command;
   But gained our lives and liberty,
    From valiant Jack's victorious hand."
Among the guests then present were five aged gentlemen, who were fathers
to some of those captives who had been freed by Jack from the dungeon of
the giants. As soon as they heard that he was the person who had done
such wonders, they pressed round him with tears of joy, to return him
thanks for the happiness he had caused to them. After this the bowl went
round, and every one drank to the health and long life of the gallant
hero. Mirth increased, and the hall was filled with peals of laughter
and joyful cries. But, on a sudden, a herald, pale and breathless with
haste and terror, rushed into the midst of the company, and told them
that Thundel, a savage giant with two heads, had heard of the death of
his two kinsmen, and was come to take his revenge on Jack; and that he
was now within a mile of the house; the people flying before him like
chaff before the wind. At this news the very boldest of the guests
trembled; but Jack drew his sword, and said: "Let him come, I have a rod
for him also. Pray, ladies and gentlemen, do me the favour to walk into
the garden, and you shall soon behold the giant's defeat and death." To
this they all agreed, and heartily wished him success in his dangerous
attempt. The knight's house stood in the middle of a moat, thirty feet
deep and twenty wide, over which lay a drawbridge. Jack set men to work
to cut the bridge on both sides, almost to the middle; and then dressed
himself in his coat of darkness, and went against the giant with his
sword of sharpness. As he came close to him, though the giant could not
see him, for his invisible coat, yet he found some danger was near,
which made him cry out:
  "Fa, fe, fi, fo, fum,
   I smell the blood of an Englishman;
   Let him be alive, or let him be dead,
   I'll grind his bones to make me bread."
"Say you so my friend?" said Jack, "you are a monstrous miller indeed."
"Art thou," cried the giant, "the villain that killed my kinsmen? Then I
will tear thee with my teeth, and grind thy bones to powder." "You must
catch me first," said Jack; and throwing off his coat of darkness, and
putting on his shoes of swiftness, he began to run; the giant following
him like a walking castle, making the earth shake at every step.
Jack led him round and round the walls of the house, that the company
might see the monster; and to finish the work Jack ran over the
drawbridge, the giant going after him with his club. But when the giant
came to the middle, where the bridge had been cut on both sides, the
great weight of his body made it break, and he tumbled into the water,
and rolled about like a large whale. Jack now stood by the side of the
moat, and laughed and jeered at him, saying: "I think you told me, you
would grind my bones to powder. When will you begin?" The giant foamed
at both his horrid mouths with fury, and plunged from side to side of
the moat; but he could not get out to have revenge on his little foe. At
last Jack ordered a cart rope to be brought to him. He then drew it over
his two heads, and by the help of a team of horses, dragged him to the
edge of the moat, where he cut off the monster's heads; and before he
either eat or drank, he sent them both to the court of King Arthur. He
then went back to the table with the company, and the rest of the day
was spent in mirth and good cheer. After staying with the knight for
some time, Jack grew weary of such an idle life, and set out again in
search of new adventures. He went over the hills and dales without
meeting any, till he came to the foot of a very high mountain. Here he
knocked at the door of a small and lonely house; and an old man, with a
head as white as snow, let him in. "Good father" said Jack, "can you
lodge a traveller who has lost his way?" "Yes," said the hermit, "I can,
if you will accept such fare as my poor house affords." Jack entered,
and the old man set before him some bread and fruit for his supper. When
Jack had eaten as much as he chose, the hermit said, "My son, I know you
are the famous conqueror of giants; now, on the top of this mountain is
an enchanted castle, kept by a giant named Galligantus, who, by the help
of a vile magician, gets many knights into his castle, where he changes
them into the shape of beasts. Above all I lament the hard fate of a
duke's daughter, whom they seized as she was walking in her father's
garden, and brought hither through the air in a chariot drawn by two
fiery dragons, and turned her into the shape of a deer. Many knights
have tried to destroy the enchantment, and deliver her; yet none have
been able to do it, by reason of two fiery griffins who guard the gate
of the castle, and destroy all who come nigh. But as you, my son, have
an invisible coat, you may pass by them without being seen; and on the
gates of the castle, you will find engraved, by what means the
enchantment may be broken."
Jack promised, that in the morning, at the risk of his life he would
break the enchantment: and after a sound sleep he arose early, put on
his invisible coat, and got ready for the attempt. When he had climbed
to the top of the mountain, he saw the two fiery griffins; but he passed
between them without the least fear of danger; for they could not see
him because of his invisible coat. On the castle gate he found a golden
trumpet, under which were written these lines:
  "Whoever can this trumpet blow,
   Shall cause the giant's overthrow."
As soon as Jack had read this, he seized the trumpet, and blew a shrill
blast which made the gates fly open and the very castle itself tremble.
The giant and the conjurer now knew that their wicked course was at an
end, and they stood biting their thumbs and shaking with fear. Jack,
with his sword of sharpness, soon killed the giant. The magician was
then carried away by a whirlwind and every knight and beautiful lady,
who had been changed into birds and beasts, returned to their proper
shapes. The castle vanished away like smoke and the head of the giant
Galligantus was sent to King Arthur. The knights and ladies rested that
night at the old man's hermitage, and next day they set out for the
court. Jack then went up to the king, and gave his majesty an account of
all his fierce battles. Jack's fame had spread through the whole
country; and at the king's desire, the duke gave him his daughter in
marriage, to the joy of all the kingdom. After this the king gave him a
large estate; on which he and his lady lived the rest of their days, in
joy and content.
LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD
Once upon a time there lived in a village a country girl, who was the
sweetest little creature that ever was seen; her mother naturally loved
her with excessive fondness, and her grandmother doted on her still
more. The good woman had made for her a pretty little red-coloured hood,
which so much became the little girl, that every one called her Little
Red Riding Hood.
One day her mother having made some cheesecakes, said to her, "Go, my
child, and see how your grandmother does, for I hear she is ill; carry
her some of these cakes, and a little pot of butter." Little Red Riding
Hood straight set out with a basket filled with the cakes and the pot of
butter, for her grandmother's house, which was in a village a little way
off the town that her mother lived in. As she was crossing a wood, which
lay in her road, she met a large wolf, which had a great mind to eat her
up, but dared not, for fear of some wood-cutters, who were at work near
them in the forest. Yet he spoke to her, and asked her whither she was
going. The little girl, who did not know the danger of talking to a
wolf, replied: "I am going to see my grandmamma, and carry these cakes
and a pot of butter." "Does she live far off?" said the wolf. "Oh yes!"
answered Little Red Riding Hood; "beyond the mill you see yonder, at the
first house in the village." "Well," said the wolf, "I will take this
way, and you take that, and see which will be there the soonest."
The wolf set out full speed, running as fast as he could, and taking the
nearest way, while the little girl took the longest; and as she went
along began to gather nuts, run after butterflies, and make nose-gays of
such flowers as she found within her reach. The wolf got to the dwelling
of the grandmother first, and knocked at the door. "Who is there?" said
some voice in the house. "It is your grandchild, Little Red Riding
Hood," said the wolf, speaking like the little girl as well as he could.
"I have brought you some cheesecakes, and a little pot of butter, that
mamma has sent you." The good old woman, who was ill in bed, called out,
"Pull the bobbin, and the latch will go up." The wolf pulled the bobbin,
and the door went open. The wolf then jumped upon the poor old
grandmother, and ate her up in a moment, for it was three days since he
had tasted any food. The wolf then shut the door, and laid himself down
in the bed, and waited for Little Red Riding Hood, who very soon after
reached the house. Tap! tap! "Who is there?" cried he. She was at first
a little afraid at hearing the gruff voice of the wolf, but she thought
that perhaps her grandmother had got a cold, so she answered: "It is
your grandchild, Little Red Riding Hood. Mamma has sent you some
cheesecakes, and a little pot of butter." The wolf cried out in a softer
voice, "Pull the bobbin, and the latch will go up." Little Red Riding
Hood pulled the bobbin, and the door went open. When she came into the
room, the wolf hid himself under the bedclothes, and said to her, trying
all he could to speak in a feeble voice: "Put the basket on the stool,
my dear, and take off your clothes, and come into bed." Little Red
Riding Hood, who always used to do as she was told, straight undressed
herself, and stepped into bed; but she thought it strange to see how her
grandmother looked in her nightclothes, so she said to her: "Dear me,
grandmamma, what great arms you have got!" "They are so much the better
to hug you, my child," replied the wolf. "But grandmamma," said the
little girl, "what great ears you have got!" "They are so much the
better to hear you, my child," replied the wolf. "But then, grandmamma,
what great eyes you have got!" said the little girl. "They are so much
the better to see you, my child," replied the wolf. "And grandmamma,
what great teeth you have got!" said the little girl, who now began to
be rather afraid. "They are to eat you up," said the wolf; and saying
these words, the wicked creature fell upon Little Red Riding Hood, and
ate her up in a moment.
THE THREE BEARS
In a far-off country there was once a little girl who was called
Silver-hair, because her curly hair shone brightly. She was a sad romp,
and so restless that she could not be kept quiet at home, but must needs
run out and away, without leave.
One day she started off into a wood to gather wild flowers, and into the
fields to chase butterflies. She ran here and she ran there, and went so
far, at last, that she found herself in a lonely place, where she saw a
snug little house, in which three bears lived; but they were not then at
home.
The door was ajar, and Silver-hair pushed it open and found the place to
be quite empty, so she made up her mind to go in boldly, and look all
about the place, little thinking what sort of people lived there.
Now the three bears had gone out to walk a little before this. They were
the Big Bear, and the Middle-sized Bear, and the Little Bear; but they
had left their porridge on the table to cool. So when Silver-hair came
into the kitchen, she saw the three bowls of porridge. She tasted the
largest bowl, which belonged to the Big Bear, and found it too cold;
then she tasted the middle-sized bowl, which belonged to the
Middle-sized Bear, and found it too hot; then she tasted the smallest
bowl, which belonged to the Little Bear, and it was just right, and she
ate it all.
She went into the parlour, and there were three chairs. She tried the
biggest chair, which belonged to the Big Bear, and found it too high;
then she tried the middle-sized chair, which belonged to the
Middle-sized Bear, and she found it too broad; then she tried the little
chair, which belonged to the Little Bear, and found it just right, but
she sat in it so hard that she broke it.
Now Silver-hair was by this time very tired, and she went upstairs to
the chamber, and there she found three beds. She tried the largest bed,
which belonged to the Big Bear, and found it too soft; then she tried
the middle-sized bed, which belonged to the Middle-sized Bear, and she
found it too hard; then she tried the smallest bed, which belonged to
the Little Bear, and found it just right, so she lay down upon it, and
fell fast asleep.
While Silver-hair was lying fast asleep, the three bears came home from
their walk. They came into the kitchen, to get their porridge, but when
the Big Bear went to his, he growled out:
"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN TASTING MY PORRIDGE!"
and the Middle-sized Bear looked into his bowl, and said:
"Somebody Has Been Tasting My Porridge!"
and the Little Bear piped:
"Somebody has tasted my porridge and eaten it all up!"
Then they went into the parlour, and the Big Bear growled:
"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN SITTING IN MY CHAIR!"
and the Middle-sized Bear said:
"Somebody Has Been Sitting In My Chair!"
"Somebody has been sitting in my chair, and has broken it all to
pieces!"
So they went upstairs into the chamber, and the Big Bear growled:
"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN TUMBLING MY BED!"
"Somebody Has Been Tumbling My Bed!"
and the little Bear piped:
"Somebody has been tumbling my bed, and here she is!"
At that, Silver-hair woke in a fright, and jumped out of the window and
ran away as fast as her legs could carry her, and never went near the
Three Bears' snug little house again.
THE PRINCESS ON THE PEA
There was once a prince who wanted to marry a princess; but she was to
be a real princess. So he travelled about, all through the world, to
find a real one, but everywhere there was something in the way. There
were princesses enough, but whether they were real princesses he could
not quite make out: there was always something that did not seem quite
right. So he came home again, and was quite sad: for he wished so much
to have a real princess. One evening a terrible storm came on. It
lightened and thundered, the rain streamed down; it was quite fearful!
Then there was a knocking at the town gate, and the old king went out to
open it.
It was a princess who stood outside the gate. But, mercy! how she
looked, from the rain and the rough weather! The water ran down from her
hair and her clothes; it ran in at the points of her shoes, and out at
the heels; and yet she declared that she was a real princess.
"Yes, we will soon find that out," thought the old queen. But she said
nothing, only went into the bedchamber, took all the bedding off, and
put a pea on the flooring of the bedstead; then she took twenty
mattresses and laid them upon the pea, and then twenty eider-down beds
upon the mattresses. On this the princess had to lie all night. In the
morning she was asked how she had slept.
"Oh, miserably!" said the princess. "I scarcely closed my eyes all night
long. Goodness knows what was in my bed. I lay upon something hard, so
that I am black and blue all over. It is quite dreadful!"
Now they saw that she was a real princess, for through the twenty
mattresses and the twenty eider-down beds she had felt the pea. No one
but a real princess could be so delicate.
So the prince took her for his wife, for now he knew that he had a true
princess; and the pea was put in the museum, and it is there now, unless
somebody has carried it off.
Look you, this is a true story.
THE UGLY DUCKLING
It was so glorious out in the country; it was summer; the cornfields
were yellow, the oats were green, the hay had been put up in stacks in
the green meadows, and the stork went about on his long red legs, and
chattered Egyptian, for this was the language he had learned from his
good mother. All around the fields and meadows were great forests, and
in the midst of these forests lay deep lakes. Yes, it was right glorious
out in the country. In the midst of the sunshine there lay an old farm,
with deep canals about it, and from the wall down to the water grew
great burdocks, so high that little children could stand upright under
the loftiest of them. It was just as wild there as in the deepest wood,
and here sat a Duck upon her nest; she had to hatch her ducklings; but
she was almost tired out before the little ones came and then she so
seldom had visitors. The other ducks liked better to swim about in the
canals than to run up to sit down under a burdock, and cackle with her.
At last one egg-shell after another burst open. "Piep! piep!" it cried,
and in all the eggs there were little creatures that stuck out their
heads.
"Quack! quack!" they said; and they all came quacking out as fast as
they could, looking all round them under the green leaves; and the
mother let them look as much as they chose, for green is good for the
eye.
"How wide the world is!" said all the young ones, for they certainly had
much more room now than when they were in the eggs.
"D'ye think this is all the world?" said the mother. "That stretches far
across the other side of the garden, quite into the parson's field; but
I have never been there yet. I hope you are all together," and she stood
up. "No, I have not all. The largest egg still lies there. How long is
that to last? I am really tired of it." And she sat down again.
"Well, how goes it?" asked an old Duck who had come to pay her a visit.
"It lasts a long time with that one egg," said the Duck who sat there.
"It will not burst. Now, only look at the others; are they not the
prettiest little ducks one could possibly see? They are all like their
father. The rogue, he never comes to see me."
"Let me see the egg which will not burst," said the old visitor. "You
may be sure it is a turkey's egg. I was once cheated in that way, and
had much anxiety and trouble with the young ones, for they are afraid of
the water. Must I say it to you, I could not get them to venture in. I
quacked and I clacked, but it was no use. Let me see the egg. Yes,
that's a turkey's egg. Let it lie there, and teach the other children to
swim."
"I think I will sit on it a little longer," said the Duck. "I've sat so
long now that I can sit a few days more."
"Just as you please," said the old Duck; and she went away.
At last the great egg burst. "Piep! piep!" said the little one, and
crept forth. It was very large and very ugly. The Duck looked at it.
"It's a very large duckling," said she; "none of the others look like
that. Can it really be a turkey chick? Well, we shall soon find out. It
must go into the water, even if I have to thrust it in myself."
The next day it was bright, beautiful weather; the sun shone on all the
green trees. The Mother-Duck went down to the canal with all her family.
Splash! she jumped into the water. "Quack! quack!" she said, and one
duckling after another plunged in. The water closed over their heads,
but they came up in an instant, and swam capitally; their legs went of
themselves, and they were all in the water. The ugly gray Duckling swam
with them.
"No, it's not a turkey," said she; "look how well it can use its legs,
and how straight it holds itself. It is my own child! On the whole it's
quite pretty, if one looks at it rightly. Quack! quack! come with me,
and I'll lead you out into the great world, and present you in the
duck-yard; but keep close to me, so that no one may tread on you, and
take care of the cats!"
And so they came into the duck-yard. There was a terrible riot going on
in there, for two families were quarrelling about an eel's head, and the
cat got it after all.
"See, that's how it goes in the world!" said the Mother-Duck; and she
whetted her beak, for she too wanted the eel's head. "Only use your
legs," she said. "See that you can bustle about, and bow your heads
before the old Duck yonder. She's the grandest of all here; she's of
Spanish blood--that's why she's so fat; and d'ye see? she has a red rag
round her leg; that's something particularly fine, and the greatest
distinction a duck can enjoy; it signifies that one does not want to
lose her, and that she's to be known by the animals and by men too.
Shake yourselves--don't turn in your toes; a well brought-up duck turns
its toes quite out, just like father and mother--so! Now bend your necks
and say 'Quack!'"
And they did so: but the other ducks round about looked at them, and
said quite boldly:
"Look there! now we're to have these hanging on, as if there were not
enough of us already! And--fie!--how that duckling yonder looks; we
won't stand that!" And one duck flew up at it, and bit it in the neck.
"Let it alone," said the mother; "it does no harm to any one."
"Yes, but it's too large and peculiar," said the Duck who had bitten it;
"and therefore it must be put down."
"Those are pretty children that the mother has there," said the old Duck
with the rag round her leg. "They're all pretty but that one; that was
rather unlucky. I wish she could bear it over again."
"That cannot be done, my lady," replied the Mother-Duck. "It is not
pretty, but it has a really good disposition, and swims as well as any
other; yes, I may even say it, swims better. I think it will grow up
pretty, and become smaller in time; it has lain too long in the egg, and
therefore is not properly shaped." And then she pinched it in the neck,
and smoothed its feathers. "Moreover, it is a drake," she said, "and
therefore it is not of so much consequence. I think he will be very
strong. He makes his way already."
"The other ducklings are graceful enough," said the old Duck. "Make
yourself at home; and if you find an eel's head, you may bring it me."
And now they were at home. But the poor Duckling which had crept last
out of the egg, and looked so ugly, was bitten and pushed and jeered, as
much by the ducks as by the chickens.
"It is too big!" they all said. And the turkey-cock, who had been born
with spurs, and therefore thought himself an emperor, blew himself up
like a ship in full sail, and bore straight down upon it; then he
gobbled and grew quite red in the face. The poor Duckling did not know
where it should stand or walk; it was quite melancholy because it looked
ugly, and was the butt of the whole duck-yard.
So it went on the first day; and afterwards it became worse and worse.
The poor Duckling was hunted about by every one; even its brothers and
sisters were quite angry with it, and said, "If the cat would only catch
you, you ugly creature!" And the mother said, "If you were only far
away!" And the ducks bit it, and the chickens beat it, and the girl who
had to feed the poultry kicked at it with her foot.
Then it ran and flew over the fence, and the little birds in the bushes
flew up in fear.
"That is because I am so ugly!" thought the Duckling; and it shut its
eyes, but flew on farther, and so it came out into the great moor, where
the wild ducks lived. Here it lay the whole night long; and it was weary
and downcast.
Towards morning the wild ducks flew up, and looked at their new
companion.
"What sort of a one are you?" they asked; and the Duckling turned in
every direction, and bowed as well as it could. "You are remarkably
ugly!" said the Wild Ducks. "But that is nothing to us, so long as you
do not marry into our family."
Poor thing! it certainly did not think of marrying, and only hoped to
obtain leave to lie among the reeds and drink some of the swamp water.
Thus it lay two whole days; then came thither two wild geese, or,
properly speaking, two wild ganders. It was not long since each had
crept out of an egg, and that's why they were so saucy.
"Listen, comrade," said one of them. "You're so ugly that I like you.
Will you go with us, and become a bird of passage? Near here, in another
moor, there are a few sweet lovely wild geese, all unmarried, and all
able to say 'Rap!' You've a chance of making your fortune, ugly as you
are."
"Piff! paff!" resounded through the air; and the two ganders fell down
dead in the swamp, and the water became blood red. "Piff! paff!" it
sounded again, and the whole flock of wild geese rose up from the reeds.
And then there was another report. A great hunt was going on. The
sportsmen were lying in wait all round the moor, and some were even
sitting up in the branches of the trees, which spread far over the
reeds. The blue smoke rose up like clouds among the dark trees, and was
wafted far away across the water; and the hunting dogs came--splash,
splash!--into the swamp, and the rushes and the reeds bent down on every
side. That was a fright for the poor Duckling! It turned its head, and
put it under its wing; but at that moment a frightful great dog stood
close by the Duckling. His tongue hung far out of his mouth, and his
eyes gleamed horrible and ugly; he thrust out his nose close against the
Duckling, showed his sharp teeth, and--splash, splash!--on he went,
without seizing it.
"Oh, Heaven be thanked!" sighed the Duckling. "I am so ugly that even
the dog does not like to bite me!"
And so it lay quite quiet, while the shots rattled through the reeds and
gun after gun was fired. At last, late in the day, all was still; but
the poor Duckling did not dare to rise up; it waited several hours
before it looked round, and then hastened away out of the moor as fast
as it could. It ran on over field and meadow; there was such a storm
raging that it was difficult to get from one place to another.
Towards evening the Duck came to a little miserable peasant's hut. This
hut was so dilapidated that it did not itself know on which side it
should fall; and that's why it remained standing. The storm whistled
round the Duckling in such a way that the poor creature was obliged to
sit down, to stand against it; and the wind blew worse and worse. Then
the Duckling noticed that one of the hinges of the door had given way,
and the door hung so slanting that the Duckling could slip through the
crack into the room; and that is what it did.
Here lived a woman, with her Cat and her Hen. And the Cat, whom she
called Sonnie, could arch his back and purr, he could even give out
sparks; but to make him do it one had to stroke his fur the wrong way.
The Hen had quite little, short legs, and therefore she was called
Chickabiddy Short-shanks. She laid good eggs, and the woman loved her
like her own child.
In the morning the strange Duckling was at once noticed, and the Cat
began to purr and the Hen to cluck.
"What's this?" said the woman, and looked all round; but she could not
see well, and therefore she thought the Duckling was a fat duck that had
strayed. "This is a rare prize!" she said. "Now I shall have duck's
eggs. I hope it is not a drake. We must try that."
And so the Duckling was admitted on trial for three weeks; but no eggs
came. And the Cat was master of the House, and the Hen was the lady, and
always said, "We and the world!" for she thought they were half the
world, and by far the better half.
The Duckling thought one might have a different opinion, but the Hen
would not allow it.
"Can you lay eggs?" she asked.
"No."
"Then will you hold your tongue!"
And the Cat said, "Can you curve your back, and purr, and give out
sparks?"
"Then you will please have no opinion of your own when sensible folks
are speaking."
And the Duckling sat in a corner and was melancholy; then the fresh air
and the sunshine streamed in; and it was seized with such a strange
longing to swim on the water, that it could not help telling the Hen of
"What are you thinking of?" cried the Hen. "You have nothing to do,
that's why you have these fancies. Lay eggs, or purr, and they will pass
over."
"But it is so charming to swim on the water!" said the Duckling, "so
refreshing to let it close above one's head, and to dive down to the
bottom."
"Yes, that must be a mighty pleasure, truly," quoth the Hen, "I fancy
you must have gone crazy. Ask the Cat about it--he's the cleverest
animal I know--ask him if he likes to swim on the water, or to dive
down--I won't speak about myself. Ask our mistress, the old woman; no
one in the world is cleverer than she. Do you think she has any desire
to swim, and to let the water close above her head?"
"You don't understand me," said the Duckling.
"We don't understand you? Then pray who is to understand you? You surely
don't pretend to be cleverer than the Cat and the woman--I won't say
anything of myself. Don't be conceited, child, and thank your Maker for
all the kindness you have received. Did you not get into a warm room,
and have you not fallen into company from which you may learn something?
But you are a chatterer, and it is not pleasant to associate with you.
You may believe me, I speak for your good. I tell you disagreeable
things, and by that one may always know one's true friends! Only take
care that you learn to lay eggs, or to purr, and give out sparks!"
"I think I will go out into the wide world," said the Duckling.
"Yes, do go," replied the Hen.
And so the Duckling went away. It swam on the water, and dived, but it
was slighted by every creature because of its ugliness.
Now came the autumn. The leaves in the forest turned yellow and brown;
the wind caught them so that they danced about, and up in the air it was
very cold. The clouds hung low, heavy with hail and snow-flakes, and on
the fence stood the raven, crying, "Croak! croak!" for mere cold; yes,
it was enough to make one feel cold to think of this. The poor little
Duckling certainly had not a good time. One evening--the sun was just
setting in his beauty--there came a whole flock of great, handsome birds
out of the bushes. They were dazzlingly white, with long, flexible
necks--they were swans. They uttered a very peculiar cry, spread forth
their glorious great wings, and flew away from that cold region to
warmer lands, to fair open lakes. They mounted so high, so high! and the
ugly Duckling felt quite strangely as it watched them. It turned round
and round in the water like a wheel, stretched out its neck towards
them, and uttered such a strange loud cry as frightened itself. Oh! it
could not forget those beautiful, happy birds; and so soon as it could
see them no longer, it dived down to the very bottom, and when it came
up again it was quite beside itself. It knew not the name of those
birds, and knew not whither they were flying; but it loved them more
than it had ever loved any one. It was not at all envious of them. How
could it think of wishing to possess such loveliness as they had? It
would have been glad if only the ducks would have endured its
company--the poor, ugly creature!
And the winter grew cold, very cold! The Duckling was forced to swim
about in the water, to prevent the surface from freezing entirely; but
every night the hole in which it swam about became smaller and smaller.
It froze so hard that the icy covering crackled again; and the Duckling
was obliged to use its legs continually to prevent the hole from
freezing up. At last it became exhausted, and lay quite still, and thus
froze fast into the ice.
Early in the morning a peasant came by, and when he saw what had
happened, he took his wooden shoe, broke the ice-crust to pieces, and
carried the Duckling home to his wife. Then it came to itself again. The
children wanted to play with it; but the Duckling thought they wanted to
hurt it, and in its terror fluttered up into the milk-pan, so that the
milk spurted down into the room. The woman clasped her hands, at which
the Duckling flew down into the butter-tub, and then into the
meal-barrel and out again. How it looked then! The woman screamed, and
struck at it with the fire-tongs; the children tumbled over one another
in their efforts to catch the Duckling; and they laughed and they
screamed!--well it was that the door stood open, and the poor creature
was able to slip out between the shrubs into the newly-fallen
snow--there it lay quite exhausted.
But it would be too melancholy if I were to tell all the misery and care
which the Duckling had to endure in the hard winter. It lay out on the
moor among the reeds, when the sun began to shine again and the larks to
sing. It was a beautiful spring.
Then all at once the Duckling could flap its wings. They beat the air
more strongly than before, and bore it strongly away; and before it well
knew how all this happened, it found itself in a great garden, where the
elder-trees smelt sweet, and bent their long green branches down to the
canal that wound through the region. Oh, here it was so beautiful, such
a gladness of spring! and from the thicket came three glorious white
swans; they rustled their wings, and swam lightly on the water. The
Duckling knew the splendid creatures, and felt oppressed by a peculiar
sadness.
"I will fly away to them, to the royal birds, and they will beat me,
because I, that am so ugly, dare to come near them. But it is all the
same. Better to be killed by them than to be pursued by ducks, and
beaten by fowls, and pushed about by the girl who takes care of the
poultry yard, and to suffer hunger in winter!" And it flew out into the
water, and swam towards the beautiful swans; these looked at it, and
came sailing down upon it with outspread wings. "Kill me!" said the poor
creature, and bent its head down upon the water, expecting nothing but
death. But what was this that it saw in the clear water? It beheld its
own image; and, lo! it was no longer a clumsy dark-gray bird, ugly and
hateful to look at, but a--swan!
It matters nothing if one is born in a duck-yard if one has only lain in
a swan's egg.
It felt quite glad at all the need and misfortune it had suffered, now
it realised its happiness in all the splendour that surrounded it. And
the great swans swam round it, and stroked it with their beaks.
Into the garden came little children, who threw bread and corn into the
water; and the youngest cried, "There is a new one!" and the other
children shouted joyously, "Yes, a new one has arrived!" And they
clapped their hands and danced about, and ran to their father and
mother; and bread and cake were thrown into the water; and they all
said, "The new one is the most beautiful of all! so young and handsome!"
and the old swans bowed their heads before him. Then he felt quite
ashamed, and hid his head under his wings, for he did not know what to
do; he was so happy, and yet not at all proud. He thought how he had
been persecuted and despised; and now he heard them saying that he was
the most beautiful of all birds. Even the elder-tree bent its branches
straight down into the water before him, and the sun shone warm and
mild. Then his wings rustled, he lifted his slender neck, and cried
rejoicingly from the depths of his heart:
"I never dreamed of so much happiness when I was the Ugly Duckling!"
THE LIGHT PRINCESS
I
What! No Children?
Once upon a time, so long ago that I have quite forgotten the date,
there lived a king and queen who had no children.
And the king said to himself, "All the queens of my acquaintance have
children, some three, some seven, and some as many as twelve; and my
queen has not one. I feel ill-used." So he made up his mind to be cross
with his wife about it. But she bore it all like a good patient queen as
she was. Then the king grew very cross indeed. But the queen pretended
to take it all as a joke, and a very good one too.
"Why don't you have any daughters, at least?" said he. "I don't say
sons; that might be too much to expect."
"I am sure, dear king, I am very sorry," said the queen.
"So you ought to be," retorted the king; "you are not going to make a
virtue of that, surely."
But he was not an ill-tempered king, and in any matter of less moment
would have let the queen have her own way with all his heart. This,
however, was an affair of State.
The queen smiled.
"You must have patience with a lady, you know, dear king," said she.
She was, indeed, a very nice queen, and heartily sorry that she could
not oblige the king immediately.
The king tried to have patience, but he succeeded very badly. It was
more than he deserved, therefore, when, at last, the queen gave him a
daughter--as lovely a little princess as ever cried.
II
Won't I, Just?
The day drew near when the infant must be christened. The king wrote all
the invitations with his own hand. Of course somebody was forgotten.
Now it does not generally matter if somebody is forgotten, only you
must mind who. Unfortunately, the king forgot without intending to
forget; and so the chance fell upon the Princess Makemnoit, which was
awkward. For the princess was the king's own sister; and he ought not to
have forgotten her. But she had made herself so disagreeable to the old
king, their father, that he had forgotten her in making his will; and so
it was no wonder that her brother forgot her in writing his invitations.
But poor relations don't do anything to keep you in mind of them. Why
don't they? The king could not see into the garret she lived in, could
he?
She was a sour, spiteful creature. The wrinkles of contempt crossed the
wrinkles of peevishness, and made her face as full of wrinkles as a pat
of butter. If ever a king could be justified in forgetting anybody, this
king was justified in forgetting his sister, even at a christening. She
looked very odd, too. Her forehead was as large as all the rest of her
face, and projected over it like a precipice. When she was angry, her
little eyes flashed blue. When she hated anybody, they shone yellow and
green. What they looked like when she loved anybody, I do not know; for
I never heard of her loving anybody but herself, and I do not think she
could have managed that if she had not somehow got used to herself. But
what made it highly imprudent in the king to forget her was--that she
was awfully clever. In fact, she was a witch; and when she bewitched
anybody, he very soon had enough of it; for she beat all the wicked
fairies in wickedness, and all the clever ones in cleverness. She
despised all the modes we read of in history, in which offended fairies
and witches have taken their revenges; and therefore, after waiting and
waiting in vain for an invitation, she made up her mind at last to go
without one, and make the whole family miserable, like a princess as she
was.
So she put on her best gown, went to the palace, was kindly received by
the happy monarch, who forgot that he had forgotten her, and took her
place in the procession to the royal chapel. When they were all gathered
about the font, she contrived to get next to it, and throw something
into the water; after which she maintained a very respectful demeanour
till the water was applied to the child's face. But at that moment she
turned round in her place three times, and muttered the following words,
loud enough for those beside her to hear:
  "Light of spirit, by my charms,
    Light of body, every part,
   Never weary human arms--
    Only crush thy parents' heart!"
They all thought she had lost her wits, and was repeating some foolish
nursery rhyme; but a shudder went through the whole of them
notwithstanding. The baby, on the contrary, began to laugh and crow;
while the nurse gave a start and a smothered cry, for, she thought she
was struck with paralysis: she could not feel the baby in her arms. But
she clasped it tight and said nothing.
The mischief was done.
III
She Can't Be Ours!
Her atrocious aunt had deprived the child of all her gravity. If you ask
me how this was effected, I answer, "In the easiest way in the world.
She had only to destroy gravitation." For the princess was a
philosopher, and knew all the ins and outs of the laws of gravitation as
well as the ins and outs of her boot-lace. And being a witch as well,
she could abrogate those laws in a moment; or at least so clog their
wheels and rust their bearings that they would not work at all. But we
have more to do with what followed than with how it was done.
The first awkwardness that resulted from this unhappy privation was,
that the moment the nurse began to float the baby up and down, she flew
from her arms towards the ceiling. Happily, the resistance of the air
brought her ascending career to a close within a foot of it. There she
remained, horizontal as when she left her nurse's arms, kicking and
laughing amazingly. The nurse in terror flew to the bell, and begged the
footman, who answered it, to bring up the house-steps directly.
Trembling in every limb, she climbed upon the steps, and had to stand
upon the very top, and reach up, before she could catch the floating
tail of the baby's long clothes.
When the strange fact came to be known, there was a terrible commotion
in the palace. The occasion of its discovery by the king was naturally a
repetition of the nurse's experience. Astonished that he felt no weight
when the child was laid in his arms, he began to wave her up and--not
down; for she slowly ascended to the ceiling as before, and there
remained floating in perfect comfort and satisfaction, as was testified
by her peals of tiny laughter. The king stood staring up in speechless
amazement, and trembled so that his beard shook like grass in the wind.
At last, turning to the queen, who was just as horror-struck as himself,
he said, gasping, staring, and stammering:
"She can't be ours, queen!"
Now the queen was much cleverer than the king, and had begun already to
suspect that "this effect defective came by cause."
"I am sure she is ours," answered she. "But we ought to have taken
better care of her at the christening. People who were never invited
ought not to have been present."
"Oh, ho!" said the king, tapping his forehead with his forefinger, "I
have it all. I've found her out. Don't you see it, queen? Princess
Makemnoit has bewitched her."
"That's just what I say," answered the queen.
"I beg your pardon, my love; I did not hear you. John! bring the steps I
get on my throne with."
For he was a little king with a great throne, like many other kings.
The throne-steps were brought, and set upon the dining-table, and John
got upon the top of them. But, he could not reach the little princess,
who lay like a baby-laughter-cloud in the air, exploding continuously.
"Take the tongs, John," said his Majesty; and getting up on the table,
he handed them to him.
John could reach the baby now, and the little princess was handed down
by the tongs.
IV
Where Is She?
One fine summer day, a month after these her first adventures, during
which time she had been very carefully watched, the princess was lying
on the bed in the queen's own chamber, fast asleep. One of the windows
was open, for it was noon, and the day was so sultry that the little
girl was wrapped in nothing less ethereal than slumber itself. The queen
came into the room, and not observing that the baby was on the bed,
opened another window. A frolicsome fairy wind, which had been watching
for a chance of mischief, rushed in at the one window, and taking its
way over the bed where the child was lying, caught her up, and rolling
and floating her along like a piece of flue, or a dandelion seed,
carried her with it through the opposite window, and away. The queen
went down-stairs, quite ignorant of the loss she had herself occasioned.
When the nurse returned, she supposed that her Majesty had carried her
off, and, dreading a scolding, delayed making inquiry about her. But
hearing nothing, she grew uneasy, and went at length to the queen's
boudoir, where she found her Majesty.
"Please, your Majesty, shall I take the baby?" said she.
"Where is she?" asked the queen.
"Please forgive me. I know it was wrong."
"What do you mean?" said the queen, looking grave.
"Oh! don't frighten me, your Majesty!" exclaimed the nurse, clasping her
hands.
The queen saw that something was amiss, and fell down in a faint. The
nurse rushed about the palace, screaming, "My baby! my baby!"
Every one ran to the queen's room. But the queen could give no orders.
They soon found out, however, that the princess was missing, and in a
moment the palace was like a beehive in a garden; and in one minute more
the queen was brought to herself by a great shout and a clapping of
hands. They had found the princess fast asleep under a rose-bush, to
which the elfish little wind-puff had carried her, finishing its
mischief by shaking a shower of red rose-leaves all over the little
white sleeper. Startled by the noise the servants made, she woke, and,
furious with glee, scattered the rose-leaves in all directions, like a
shower of spray in the sunset.
She was watched more carefully after this, no doubt; yet it would be
endless to relate all the odd incidents resulting from this peculiarity
of the young princess. But there never was a baby in a house, not to say
a palace, that kept the household in such constant good humour, at least
below-stairs. If it was not easy for her nurses to hold her, at least
she made neither their arms nor their hearts ache. And she was so nice
to play at ball with! There was positively no danger of letting her
fall. They might throw her down, or knock her down, or push her down,
but they couldn't let her down. It is true, they might let her fly
into the fire or the coal-hole, or through the window; but none of these
accidents had happened as yet. If you heard peals of laughter resounding
from some unknown region, you might be sure enough of the cause. Going
down into the kitchen, or the room, you would find Jane and Thomas,
and Robert and Susan, all and sum, playing at ball with the little
princess. She was the ball herself, and did not enjoy it the less for
that. Away she went, flying from one to another, screeching with
laughter. And the servants loved the ball itself better even than the
game. But they had to take some care how they threw her, for if she
received an upward direction, she would never come down again without
being fetched.
V
What Is to Be Done?
But above-stairs it was different. One day, for instance, after
breakfast, the king went into his counting-house, and counted out his
money.
The operation gave him no pleasure.
"To think," said he to himself, "that every one of these gold sovereigns
weighs a quarter of an ounce, and my real, live, flesh-and-blood
princess weighs nothing at all!"
And he hated his gold sovereigns, as they lay with a broad smile of
self-satisfaction all over their yellow faces.
The queen was in the parlour, eating bread and honey. But at the second
mouthful she burst out crying, and could not swallow it. The king heard
her sobbing. Glad of anybody, but especially of his queen, to quarrel
with, he clashed his gold sovereigns into his money-box, clapped his
crown on his head, and rushed into the parlour.
"What is all this about?" exclaimed he. "What are you crying for,
queen?"
"I can't eat it," said the queen, looking ruefully at the honey-pot.
"No wonder!" retorted the king. "You've just eaten your breakfast--two
turkey eggs, and three anchovies."
"Oh, that's not it!" sobbed her Majesty. "It's my child, my child!"
"Well, what's the matter with your child? She's neither up the chimney
nor down the draw-well. Just hear her laughing."
Yet the king could not help a sigh, which he tried to turn into a cough,
saying:
"It is a good thing to be light-hearted, I am sure, whether she be ours
or not."
"It is a bad thing to be light-headed," answered the queen, looking with
prophetic soul far into the future.
"'T is a good thing to be light-handed," said the king.
"'T is a bad thing to be light-fingered," answered the queen.
"'T is a good thing to be light-footed," said the king.
"'T is a bad thing--" began the queen; but the king interrupted her.
"In fact," said he, with the tone of one who concludes an argument in
which he has had only imaginary opponents, and in which, therefore, he
has come off triumphant--"in fact, it is a good thing altogether to be
light-bodied."
"But it is a bad thing altogether to be light-minded," retorted the
queen, who was beginning to lose her temper.
This last answer quite discomfited his Majesty, who turned on his heel,
and betook himself to his counting-house again. But he was not half-way
towards it, when the voice of his queen overtook him.
"And it's a bad thing to be light-haired," screamed she, determined to
have more last words, now that her spirit was roused.
The queen's hair was black as night; and the king's had been, and his
daughter's was, golden as morning. But it was not this reflection on his
hair that arrested him; it was the double use of the word light. For
the king hated all witticisms, and punning especially. And besides, he
could not tell whether the queen meant light-haired or light-heired;
for why might she not aspirate her vowels when she was exasperated
herself?
He turned upon his other heel, and rejoined her. She looked angry still,
because she knew that she was guilty, or, what was much the same, knew
that he thought so.
"My dear queen," said he, "duplicity of any sort is exceedingly
objectionable between married people of any rank, not to say kings and
queens; and the most objectionable form duplicity can assume is that of
punning."
"There!" said the queen, "I never made a jest, but I broke it in the
making. I am the most unfortunate woman in the world!"
She looked so rueful that the king took her in his arms; and they sat
down to consult.
"Can you bear this?" said the king.
"No, I can't," said the queen.
"Well, what's to be done?" said the king.
"I'm sure I don't know," said the queen. "But might you not try an
apology?"
"To my old sister, I suppose you mean?" said the king.
"Yes," said the queen.
"Well, I don't mind," said the king.
So he went the next morning to the house of the princess, and, making a
very humble apology, begged her to undo the spell. But the princess
declared, with a grave face, that she knew nothing at all about it. Her
eyes, however, shone pink, which was a sign that she was happy. She
advised the king and queen to have patience, and to mend their ways. The
king returned disconsolate. The queen tried to comfort him.
"We will wait till she is older. She may then be able to suggest
something herself. She will know at least how she feels, and explain
things to us."
"But what if she should marry?" exclaimed the king, in sudden
consternation at the idea.
"Well, what of that?" rejoined the queen.
"Just think! If she were to have children! In the course of a hundred
years the air might be as full of floating children as of gossamers in
autumn."
"That is no business of ours," replied the queen. "Besides, by that time
they will have learned to take care of themselves."
A sigh was the king's only answer.
He would have consulted the court physicians; but he was afraid they
would try experiments upon her.
VI
She Laughs Too Much
Meantime, notwithstanding awkward occurrences, and griefs that she
brought upon her parents, the little princess laughed and grew--not fat,
but plump and tall. She reached the age of seventeen, without having
fallen into any worse scrape than a chimney; by rescuing her from which,
a little bird-nesting urchin got fame and a black face. Nor, thoughtless
as she was, had she committed anything worse than laughter at everybody
and everything that came in her way. When she was told, for the sake of
experiment, that General Clanrunfort was cut to pieces with all his
troops, she laughed; when she heard that the enemy was on his way to
besiege her father's capital, she laughed hugely; but when she was told
that the city would certainly be abandoned to the mercy of the enemy's
soldiery--why, then she laughed immoderately. She never could be brought
to see the serious side of anything. When her mother cried, she said:
"What queer faces mamma makes! And she squeezes water out of her cheeks!
Funny mamma!"
And when her papa stormed at her, she laughed, and danced round and
round him, clapping her hands, and crying:
"Do it again, papa. Do it again! It's such fun! Dear, funny papa!"
And if he tried to catch her, she glided from him in an instant, not in
the least afraid of him, but thinking it part of the game not to be
caught. With one push of her foot, she would be floating in the air
above his head; or she would go dancing backwards and forwards and
sideways, like a great butterfly. It happened several times, when her
father and mother were holding a consultation about her in private, that
they were interrupted by vainly repressed outbursts of laughter over
their heads; and looking up with indignation, saw her floating at full
length in the air above them, whence she regarded them with the most
comical appreciation of the position.
One day an awkward accident happened. The princess had come out upon the
lawn with one of her attendants, who held her by the hand. Spying her
father at the other side of the lawn, she snatched her hand from the
maid's, and sped across to him. Now when she wanted to run alone, her
custom was to catch up a stone in each hand, so that she might come down
again after a bound. Whatever she wore as part of her attire had no
effect in this way. Even gold, when it thus became as it were a part of
herself, lost all its weight for the time. But whatever she only held in
her hands retained its downward tendency. On this occasion she could see
nothing to catch up but a huge toad, that was walking across the lawn as
if he had a hundred years to do it in. Not knowing what disgust meant,
for this was one of her peculiarities, she snatched up the toad and
bounded away. She had almost reached her father, and he was holding out
his arms to receive her, and take from her lips the kiss which hovered
on them like a butterfly on a rosebud, when a puff of wind blew her
aside into the arms of a young page, who had just been receiving a
message from his Majesty. Now it was no great peculiarity in the
princess that, once she was set agoing, it always cost her time and
trouble to check herself. On this occasion there was no time. She must
kiss--and she kissed the page. She did not mind it much; for she had no
shyness in her composition; and she knew, besides, that she could not
help it. So she only laughed, like a musical box. The poor page fared
the worst. For the princess, trying to correct the unfortunate tendency
of the kiss, put out her hands to keep off the page; so that, along with
the kiss, he received, on the other cheek, a slap with the huge black
toad, which she poked right into his eye. He tried to laugh, too, but
the attempt resulted in such an odd contortion of countenance, as showed
that there was no danger of his pluming himself on the kiss. As for the
king, his dignity was greatly hurt, and he did not speak to the page for
a whole month.
I may here remark that it was very amusing to see her run, if her mode
of progression could properly be called running. For first she would
make a bound; then, having alighted, she would run a few steps, and make
another bound. Sometimes she would fancy she had reached the ground
before she actually had, and her feet would go backwards and forwards,
running upon nothing at all, like those of a chicken on its back. Then
she would laugh like the very spirit of fun; only in her laugh there was
something missing. What it was, I find myself unable to describe. I
think it was a certain tone, depending upon the possibility of
sorrow--morbidezza, perhaps. She never smiled.
VII
Try Metaphysics
After a long avoidance of the painful subject, the king and queen
resolved to hold a council of three upon it; and so they sent for the
princess. In she came, sliding and flitting and gliding from one piece
of furniture to another, and put herself at last in an arm-chair, in a
sitting posture. Whether she could be said to sit, seeing she received
no support from the seat of the chair, I do not pretend to determine.
"My dear child," said the king, "you must be aware by this time that you
are not exactly like other people."
"Oh, you dear funny papa! I have got a nose, and two eyes, and all the
rest. So have you. So has mamma."
"Now be serious, my dear, for once," said the queen.
"No, thank you, mamma; I had rather not."
"Would you not like to be able to walk like other people?" said the
king.
"No indeed, I should think not. You only crawl. You are such slow
coaches!"
"How do you feel, my child?" he resumed, after a pause of discomfiture.
"Quite well, thank you."
"I mean, what do you feel like?"
"Like nothing at all, that I know of."
"You must feel like something."
"I feel like a princess with such a funny papa, and such a dear pet of a
queen-mamma!"
"Now really!" began the queen; but the princess interrupted her.
"Oh, yes," she added, "I remember. I have a curious feeling sometimes,
as if I were the only person that had any sense in the whole world."
She had been trying to behave herself with dignity; but now she burst
into a violent fit of laughter, threw herself backwards over the chair,
and went rolling about the floor in an ecstasy of enjoyment. The king
picked her up easier than one does a down quilt, and replaced her in her
former relation to the chair. The exact preposition expressing this
relation I do not happen to know.
"Is there nothing you wish for?" resumed the king, who had learned by
this time that it was useless to be angry with her.
"Oh, you dear papa!--yes," answered she.
"What is it, my darling?"
"I have been longing for it--oh, such a time!--ever since last night."
"Tell me what it is."
"Will you promise to let me have it?"
The king was on the point of saying yes, but the wiser queen checked him
with a single motion of her head.
"Tell me what it is first," said he.
"No, no. Promise first."
"I dare not. What is it?"
"Mind, I hold you to your promise. It is--to be tied to the end of a
string--a very long string indeed, and be flown like a kite. Oh, such
fun! I would rain rose-water, and hail sugar-plums, and snow
whipped-cream, and--and--and--"
A fit of laughing checked her; and she would have been off again over
the floor, had not the king started up and caught her just in time.
Seeing that nothing but talk could be got out of her, he rang the bell,
and sent her away with two of her ladies-in-waiting.
"Now, queen," he said, turning to her Majesty, "what is to be done?"
"There is but one thing left," answered she. "Let us consult the college
of Metaphysicians."
"Bravo!" cried the king; "we will."
Now at the head of this college were two very wise Chinese
philosophers--by name Hum-Drum, and Kopy-Keck. For them the king sent;
and straightway they came. In a long speech he communicated to them what
they knew very well already--as who did not?--namely, the peculiar
condition of his daughter in relation to the globe on which she dwelt;
and requested them to consult together as to what might be the cause and
probable cure of her infirmity. The king laid stress upon the word,
but failed to discover his own pun. The queen laughed; but Hum-Drum and
Kopy-Keck heard with humility and retired in silence.
Their consultation consisted chiefly in propounding and supporting, for
the thousandth time, each his favourite theories. For the condition of
the princess afforded delightful scope for the discussion of every
question arising from the division of thought--in fact, of all the
Metaphysics of the Chinese Empire. But it is only justice to say that
they did not altogether neglect the discussion of the practical
question, what was to be done.
Hum-Drum was a Materialist, and Kopy-Keck was a Spiritualist. The former
was slow and sententious; the latter was quick and flighty; the latter
had generally the first word; the former the last.
"I reassert my former assertion," began Kopy-Keck, with a plunge. "There
is not a fault in the princess, body or soul; only they are wrong put
together. Listen to me now, Hum-Drum, and I will tell you in brief what
I think. Don't speak. Don't answer me. I won't hear you till I have
done. At that decisive moment, when souls seek their appointed
habitations, two eager souls met, struck, rebounded, lost their way, and
arrived each at the wrong place. The soul of the princess was one of
those, and she went far astray. She does not belong by rights to this
world at all, but to some other planet, probably Mercury. Her proclivity
to her true sphere destroys all the natural influence which this orb
would otherwise possess over her corporeal frame. She cares for nothing
here. There is no relation between her and this world.
"She must therefore be taught, by the sternest compulsion, to take an
interest in the earth as the earth. She must study every department of
its history--its animal history, its vegetable history, its mineral
history, its social history, its moral history, its political history,
its scientific history, its literary history, its musical history, its
artistical history, above all, its metaphysical history. She must begin
with the Chinese dynasty and end with Japan. But first of all she must
study geology, and especially the history of the extinct races of
animals--their natures, their habits, their loves, their hates, their
revenges. She must--"
"Hold, h-o-o-old!" roared Hum-Drum. "It is certainly my turn now. My
rooted and insubvertible conviction is, that the causes of the anomalies
evident in the princess's condition are strictly and solely physical.
But that is only tantamount to acknowledging that they exist. Hear my
opinion. From some cause or other, of no importance to our inquiry, the
motion of her heart has been reversed. That remarkable combination of
the suction and the force-pump works the wrong way--I mean in the case
of the unfortunate princess, it draws in where it should force out, and
forces out where it should draw in. The offices of the auricles and the
ventricles are subverted. The blood is sent forth by the veins, and
returns by the arteries. Consequently it is running the wrong way
through all her corporeal organism--lungs and all. Is it then at all
mysterious, seeing that such is the case, that on the other particular
of gravitation as well, she should differ from normal humanity? My
proposal for the cure is this:
"Phlebotomise until she is reduced to the last point of safety. Let it
be effected, if necessary, in a warm bath. When she is reduced to a
state of perfect asphyxy, apply a ligature to the left ankle, drawing it
as tight as the bone will bear. Apply, at the same moment, another of
equal tension around the right wrist. By means of plates constructed for
the purpose, place the other foot and hand under the receivers of two
air-pumps. Exhaust the receivers. Exhibit a pint of French brandy, and
await the result."
"Which would presently arrive in the form of grim Death," said
Kopy-Keck.
"If it should, she would yet die in doing our duty," retorted Hum-Drum.
But their Majesties had too much tenderness for their volatile offspring
to subject her to either of the schemes of the equally unscrupulous
philosophers. Indeed, the most complete knowledge of the laws of nature
would have been unserviceable in her case; for it was impossible to
classify her. She was a fifth imponderable body, sharing all the other
properties of the ponderable.
VIII
Try a Drop of Water
Perhaps the best thing for the princess would have been to fall in love.
But how a princess who had no gravity could fall into anything is a
difficulty--perhaps the difficulty. As for her own feelings on the
subject, she did not even know that there was such a beehive of honey
and stings to be fallen into. But now I come to mention another curious
fact about her.
The palace was built on the shores of the loveliest lake in the world;
and the princess loved this lake more than father or mother. The root of
this preference no doubt, although the princess did not recognise it as
such, was, that the moment she got into it, she recovered the natural
right of which she had been so wickedly deprived--namely, gravity.
Whether this was owing to the fact that water had been employed as the
means of conveying the injury, I do not know. But it is certain that she
could swim and dive like the duck that her old nurse said she was. The
manner in which this alleviation of her misfortune was discovered was as
follows:
One summer evening, during the carnival of the country, she had been
taken upon the lake by the king and queen, in the royal barge. They were
accompanied by many of the courtiers in a fleet of little boats. In the
middle of the lake she wanted to get into the lord chancellor's barge,
for his daughter, who was a great favourite with her, was in it with her
father. Now though the old king rarely condescended to make light of his
misfortune, yet, happening on this occasion to be in a particularly good
humour, as the barges approached each other, he caught up the princess
to throw her into the chancellor's barge. He lost his balance, however,
and, dropping into the bottom of the barge, lost his hold of his
daughter; not, however, before imparting to her the downward tendency of
his own person, though in a somewhat different direction, for, as the
king fell into the boat, she fell into the water. With a burst of
delighted laughter she disappeared into the lake. A cry of horror
ascended from the boats. They had never seen the princess go down
before. Half the men were under water in a moment; but they had all, one
after another, come up to the surface again for breath, when--tinkle,
tinkle, babble, and gush! came the princess's laugh over the water from
far away. There she was, swimming like a swan. Nor would she come out
for king or queen, chancellor or daughter. She was perfectly obstinate.
But at the same time she seemed more sedate than usual. Perhaps that was
because a great pleasure spoils laughing. At all events, after this, the
passion of her life was to get into the water, and she was always the
better behaved and the more beautiful the more she had of it. Summer and
winter it was quite the same; only she could not stay so long in the
water when they had to break the ice to let her in. Any day, from
morning to evening in summer, she might be descried--a streak of white
in the blue water--lying as still as the shadow of a cloud, or shooting
along like a dolphin; disappearing, and coming up again far off, just
where one did not expect her. She would have been in the lake of a night
too, if she could have had her way; for the balcony of her window
overhung a deep pool in it; and through a shallow reedy passage she
could have swum out into the wide wet water, and no one would have been
any the wiser. Indeed, when she happened to wake in the moonlight she
could hardly resist the temptation. But there was the sad difficulty of
getting into it. She had as great a dread of the air as some children
have of the water. For the slightest gust of wind would blow her away;
and a gust might arise in the stillest moment. And if she gave herself a
push towards the water and just failed of reaching it, her situation
would be dreadfully awkward, irrespective of the wind; for at best there
she would have to remain, suspended in her night-gown, till she was seen
and angled for by somebody from the window.
"Oh! if I had my gravity," thought she, contemplating the water, "I
would flash off this balcony like a long white sea-bird, headlong into
the darling wetness. Heigh-ho!"
This was the only consideration that made her wish to be like other
people.
Another reason for her being fond of the water was that in it alone she
enjoyed any freedom. For she could not walk without a cortège,
consisting in part of a troop of light-horse, for fear of the liberties
which the wind might take with her. And the king grew more apprehensive
with increasing years, till at last he would not allow her to walk
abroad at all without some twenty silken cords fastened to as many parts
of her dress, and held by twenty noblemen. Of course horseback was out
of the question. But she bade good-bye to all this ceremony when she got
into the water.
And so remarkable were its effects upon her, especially in restoring her
for the time to the ordinary human gravity, that Hum-Drum and Kopy-Keck
agreed in recommending the king to bury her alive for three years; in
the hope that, as the water did her so much good, the earth would do her
yet more. But the king had some vulgar prejudices against the
experiment, and would not give his consent. Foiled in this, they yet
agreed in another recommendation; which, seeing that one imported his
opinions from China and the other from Thibet, was very remarkable
indeed. They argued that, if water of external origin and application
could be so efficacious, water from a deeper source might work a perfect
cure; in short, that if the poor afflicted princess could by any means
be made to cry, she might recover her lost gravity.
But how was this to be brought about? Therein lay all the difficulty--to
meet which the philosophers were not wise enough. To make the princess
cry was as impossible as to make her weigh. They sent for a professional
beggar, commanded him to prepare his most touching oracle of woe, helped
him out of the court charade box to whatever he wanted for dressing up,
and promised great rewards in the event of his success. But it was all
in vain. She listened to the mendicant artist's story, and gazed at his
marvellous make up, till she could contain herself no longer, and went
into the most undignified contortions for relief, shrieking, positively
screeching with laughter.
When she had a little recovered herself, she ordered her attendants to
drive him away, and not give him a single copper; whereupon his look of
mortified discomfiture wrought her punishment and his revenge, for it
sent her into violent hysterics, from which she was with difficulty
recovered.
But so anxious was the king that the suggestion should have a fair
trial, that he put himself in a rage one day, and, rushing up to her
room, gave her an awful whipping. Yet not a tear would flow. She looked
grave, and her laughing sounded uncommonly like screaming--that was all.
The good old tyrant, though he put on his best gold spectacles to look,
could not discover the smallest cloud in the serene blue of her eyes.
IX
Put Me in Again!
It must have been about this time that the son of a king, who lived a
thousand miles from Lagobel, set out to look for the daughter of a
queen. He travelled far and wide, but as sure as he found a princess, he
found some fault with her. Of course he could not marry a mere woman,
however beautiful; and there was no princess to be found worthy of him.
Whether the prince was so near perfection that he had a right to demand
perfection itself, I cannot pretend to say. All I know is, that he was a
fine, handsome, brave, generous, well-bred, and well-behaved youth, as
all princes are.
In his wanderings he had come across some reports about our princess;
but as everybody said she was bewitched, he never dreamed that she could
bewitch him. For what indeed could a prince do with a princess that had
lost her gravity? Who could tell what she might not lose next? She might
lose her visibility, or her tangibility; or, in short, the power of
making impressions upon the radical sensorium; so that he should never
be able to tell whether she was dead or alive. Of course he made no
further inquiries about her.
One day he lost sight of his retinue in a great forest. These forests
are very useful in delivering princes from their courtiers, like a sieve
that keeps back the bran. Then the princes get away to follow their
fortunes. In this way they have the advantage of the princesses, who are
forced to marry before they have had a bit of fun. I wish our princesses
got lost in a forest sometimes.
One lovely evening, after wandering about for many days, he found that
he was approaching the outskirts of this forest; for the trees had got
so thin that he could see the sunset through them; and he soon came upon
a kind of heath. Next he came upon signs of human neighbourhood; but by
this time it was getting late, and there was nobody in the fields to
direct him.
After travelling for another hour, his horse, quite worn out with long
labour and lack of food, fell, and was unable to rise again. So he
continued his journey on foot. A length he entered another wood--not a
wild forest, but a civilised wood, through which a footpath led him to
the side of a lake. Along this path the prince pursued his way through
the gathering darkness. Suddenly he paused, and listened. Strange sounds
came across the water. It was, in fact, the princess laughing. Now there
was something odd in her laugh, as I have already hinted; for the
hatching of a real hearty laugh requires the incubation of gravity; and
perhaps this was how the prince mistook the laughter for screaming.
Looking over the lake, he saw something white in the water; and, in an
instant, he had torn off his tunic, kicked off his sandals, and plunged
in. He soon reached the white object, and found that it was a woman.
There was not light enough to show that she was a princess, but quite
enough to show that she was a lady, for it does not want much light to
see that.
Now I cannot tell how it came about--whether she pretended to be
drowning, or whether he frightened her, or caught her so as to embarrass
her--but certainly he brought her to shore in a fashion ignominious to a
swimmer, and more nearly drowned than she had ever expected to be; for
the water had got into her throat as often as she had tried to speak.
At the place to which he bore her, the bank was only a foot or two above
the water; so he gave her a strong lift out of the water, to lay her on
the bank. But, her gravitation ceasing the moment she left the water,
away she went up into the air, scolding and screaming.
"You naughty, naughty, Naughty, NAUGHTY man!" she cried.
No one had ever succeeded in putting her into a passion before. When the
prince saw her ascend, he thought he must have been bewitched, and have
mistaken a great swan for a lady. But the princess caught hold of the
topmost cone upon a lofty fir. This came off; but she caught at another;
and, in fact, stopped herself by gathering cones, dropping them as the
stalks gave way. The prince, meantime, stood in the water, staring, and
forgetting to get out. But the princess disappearing, he scrambled on
shore, and went in the direction of the tree. There he found her
climbing down one of the branches towards the stem. But in the darkness
of the wood, the prince continued in some bewilderment as to what the
phenomenon could be; until, reaching the ground, and seeing him standing
there, she caught hold of him, and said:
"I'll tell papa,"
"Oh no, you won't!" returned the prince.
"Yes, I will," she persisted. "What business had you to pull me down out
of the water, and throw me to the bottom of the air? I never did you any
harm."
"Pardon me. I did not mean to hurt you."
"I don't believe you have any brains; and that is a worse loss than your
wretched gravity. I pity you."
The prince now saw that he had come upon the bewitched princess, and had
already offended her. But before he could think what to say next, she
burst out angrily, giving a stamp with her foot that would have sent her
aloft again but for the hold she had of his arm:
"Put me up directly."
"Put you up where, you beauty?" asked the prince.
He had fallen in love with her almost, already; for her anger made her
more charming than any one else had ever beheld her; and, as far as he
could see, which certainly was not far, she had not a single fault about
her, except, of course, that she had not any gravity. No prince,
however, would judge of a princess by weight. The loveliness of her foot
he would hardly estimate by the depth of the impression it could make in
mud.
"In the water, you stupid!" answered the princess.
"Come, then," said the prince.
The condition of her dress, increasing her usual difficulty in walking,
compelled her to cling to him; and he could hardly persuade himself that
he was not in a delightful dream, notwithstanding the torrent of musical
abuse with which she overwhelmed him. The prince being therefore in no
hurry, they came upon the lake at quite another part, where the bank was
twenty-five feet high at least; and when they had reached the edge, he
turned towards the princess, and said:
"How am I to put you in?"
"That is your business," she answered, quite snappishly. "You took me
out--put me in again."
"Very well," said the prince; and, catching her up in his arms, he
sprang with her from the rock. The princess had just time to give one
delighted shriek of laughter before the water closed over them. When
they came to the surface, she found that, for a moment or two, she could
not even laugh, for she had gone down with such a rush, that it was with
difficulty she recovered her breath. The instant they reached the
surface--
"How do you like falling in?" said the prince.
After some effort the princess panted out:
"Is that what you call falling in?"
"Yes," answered the prince, "I should think it a very tolerable
specimen."
"It seemed to me like going up," rejoined she.
"My feeling was certainly one of elevation too," the prince conceded.
The princess did not appear to understand him, for she retorted his
question:
"How do you like falling in?" said the princess.
"Beyond everything," answered he; "for I have fallen in with the only
perfect creature I ever saw."
"No more of that. I am tired of it," said the princess.
Perhaps she shared her father's aversion to punning.
"Don't you like falling in, then?" said the prince.
"It is the most delightful fun I ever had in my life," answered she. "I
never fell before. I wish I could learn. To think I am the only person
in my father's kingdom that can't fall!"
Here the poor princess looked almost sad.
"I shall be most happy to fall in with you any time you like," said the
prince, devotedly.
"Thank you. I don't know. Perhaps it would not be proper. But I don't
care. At all events, as we have fallen in, let us have a swim together."
"With all my heart," responded the prince.
And away they went, swimming, and diving, and floating, until at last
they heard cries along the shore, and saw lights glancing in all
directions. It was now quite late, and there was no moon.
"I must go home," said the princess. "I am very sorry, for this is
delightful."
"So am I," returned the prince. "But I am glad I haven't a home to go
to--at least, I don't exactly know where it is."
"I wish I hadn't one either," rejoined the princess; "it is so stupid! I
have a great mind," she continued, "to play them all a trick. Why
couldn't they leave me alone? They won't trust me in the lake for a
single night! You see where that green light is burning? That is the
window of my room. Now if you would just swim there with me very
quietly, and when we are all but under the balcony, give me such a
push--up you call it--as you did a little while ago, I should be able
to catch hold of the balcony, and get in at the window; and then they
may look for me till to-morrow morning!"
"With more obedience than pleasure," said the prince, gallantly; and
away they swam, very gently.
"Will you be in the lake to-morrow night?" the prince ventured to ask.
"To be sure I will. I don't think so. Perhaps," was the princess's
somewhat strange answer.
But the prince was intelligent enough not to press her further; and
merely whispered, as he gave her the parting lift, "Don't tell." The
only answer the princess returned was a roguish look. She was already a
yard above his head. The look seemed to say, "Never fear. It is too good
fun to spoil that way."
So perfectly like other people had she been in the water, that even yet
the prince could scarcely believe his eyes when he saw her ascend
slowly, grasp the balcony, and disappear through the window. He turned,
almost expecting to see her still by his side. But he was alone in the
water. So he swam away quietly, and watched the lights roving about the
shore for hours after the princess was safe in her chamber. As soon as
they disappeared, he landed in search of his tunic and sword, and, after
some trouble, found them again. Then he made the best of his way round
the lake to the other side. There the wood was wilder, and the shore
steeper--rising more immediately towards the mountains which surrounded
the lake on all sides, and kept sending it messages of silvery streams
from morning to night, and all night long. He soon found a spot where he
could see the green light in the princess's room, and where, even in the
broad daylight, he would be in no danger of being discovered from the
opposite shore. It was a sort of cave in the rock, where he provided
himself a bed of withered leaves, and lay down too tired for hunger to
keep him awake. All night long he dreamed that he was swimming with the
princess.
X
Look at the Moon
Early the next morning the prince set out to look for something to eat,
which he soon found at a forester's hut, where for many following days
he was supplied with all that a brave prince could consider necessary.
And having plenty to keep him alive for the present, he would not think
of wants not yet in existence. Whenever Care intruded, this prince
always bowed him out in the most princely manner.
When he returned from his breakfast to his watch-cave, he saw the
princess already floating about in the lake, attended by the king and
queen--whom he knew by their crowns--and a great company in lovely
little boats, with canopies of all the colours of the rainbow, and flags
and streamers of a great many more. It was a very bright day, and the
prince, burned up with the heat, began to long for the cold water and
the cool princess. But he had to endure till twilight; for the boats had
provisions on board, and it was not till the sun went down that the gay
party began to vanish. Boat after boat drew away to the shore, following
that of the king and queen, till only one, apparently the princess's own
boat, remained. But she did not want to go home even yet, and the prince
thought he saw her order the boat to the shore without her. At all
events it rowed away; and now, of all the radiant company, only one
white speck remained. Then the prince began to sing.
And this is what he sung:
  "Lady fair,
   Swan-white,
   Lift thine eyes,
   Banish night
   By the might
   Of thine eyes.
  "Snowy arms,
   Oars of snow,
   Oar her hither,
   Plashing low.
   Soft and slow,
   Oar her hither.
  "Stream behind her
   O'er the lake,
   Radiant whiteness!
   In her wake
   Following, following, for her sake,
  "Cling about her,
   Waters blue;
   Part not from her,
   But renew
   Cold and true
   Kisses round her.
  "Lap me round,
   Waters sad
   That have left her
   Make me glad,
   For ye had
   Kissed her ere ye left her."
Before he had finished his song, the princess was just under the place
where he sat, and looking up to find him. Her ears had led her truly.
"Would you like a fall, princess?" said the prince, looking down.
"Ah! there you are! Yes, if you please, prince," said the princess,
looking up.
"How do you know I am a prince, princess?" said the prince.
"Because you are a very nice young man, prince," said the princess.
"Come up then, princess."
"Fetch me, prince."
The prince took off his scarf, then his swordbelt then his tunic, and
tied them all together, and let them down. But the line was far too
short. He unwound his turban, and added it to the rest, when it was all
but long enough; and his purse completed it. The princess just managed
to lay hold of the knot of money, and was beside him in a moment. This
rock was much higher than the other, and the splash and the dive were
tremendous. The princess was in ecstasies of delight, and their swim was
delicious.
Night after night they met, and swam about in the dark clear lake, where
such was the prince's gladness, that (whether the princess's way of
looking at things infected him, or he was actually getting light-headed)
he often fancied that he was swimming in the sky instead of the lake.
But when he talked about being in heaven, the princess laughed at him
dreadfully.
When the moon came, she brought them fresh pleasure. Everything looked
strange and new in her light, with an old, withered, yet unfading
newness. When the moon was nearly full, one of their great delights was
to dive deep in the water, and then, turning round, look up through it
at the great blot of light close above them, shimmering and trembling
and wavering, spreading and contracting, seeming to melt away, and again
grow solid. Then they would shoot up through the blot, and lo! there was
the moon, far off, clear and steady and cold, and very lovely, at the
bottom of a deeper and bluer lake than theirs, as the princess said.
The prince soon found out that while in the water the princess was very
like other people. And besides this, she was not so forward in her
questions or pert in her replies at sea as on shore. Neither did she
laugh so much; and when she did laugh, it was more gently. She seemed
altogether more modest and maidenly in the water than out of it. But
when the prince, who had really fallen in love when he fell in the lake,
began to talk to her about love, she always turned her head towards him
and laughed. After a while she began to look puzzled, as if she were
trying to understand what he meant, but could not--revealing a notion
that he meant something. But as soon as ever she left the lake, she was
so altered, that the prince said to himself, "If I marry her, I see no
help for it: we must turn merman and mermaid, and go out to sea at
once,"
XI
Hiss!
The princess's pleasure in the lake had grown to a passion, and she
could scarcely bear to be out of it for an hour. Imagine then her
consternation, when, diving with the prince one night, a sudden
suspicion seized her that the lake was not so deep as it used to be. The
prince could not imagine what had happened. She shot to the surface,
and, without a word, swam at full speed towards the higher side of the
lake. He followed, begging to know if she was ill, or what was the
matter. She never turned her head, or took the smallest notice of his
question. Arrived at the shore, she coasted the rocks with minute
inspection. But she was not able to come to a conclusion, for the moon
was very small, and so she could not see well. She turned therefore and
swam home, without saying a word to explain her conduct to the prince,
of whose presence she seemed no longer conscious. He withdrew to his
cave, in great perplexity and distress.
Next day she made many observations, which, alas! strengthened her
fears. She saw that the banks were too dry; and that the grass on the
shore, and the trailing plants on the rocks, were withering away. She
caused marks to be made along the borders, and examined them, day after
day, in all directions of the wind; till at last the horrible idea
became a certain fact--that the surface of the lake was slowly sinking.
The poor princess nearly went out of the little mind she had. It was
awful to her to see the lake, which she loved more than any living
thing, lie dying before her eyes. It sank away, slowly vanishing. The
tops of rocks that had never been seen till now, began to appear far
down in the clear water. Before long they were dry in the sun. It was
fearful to think of the mud that would soon lie there baking and
festering, full of lovely creatures dying, and ugly creatures coming to
life, like the unmaking of a world. And how hot the sun would be without
any lake! She could not bear to swim in it any more, and began to pine
away. Her life seemed bound up with it; and ever as the lake sank, she
pined. People said she would not live an hour after the lake was gone.
But she never cried.
Proclamation was made to all the kingdom, that whosoever should discover
the cause of the lake's decrease, would be rewarded after a princely
fashion. Hum-Drum and Kopy-Keck applied themselves to their physics and
metaphysics; but in vain. Not even they could suggest a cause.
Now the fact was that the old princess was at the root of the mischief.
When she heard that her niece found more pleasure in the water than any
one else had out of it, she went into a rage, and cursed herself for her
want of foresight,
"But," said she, "I will soon set all right. The king and the people
shall die of thirst; their brains shall boil and frizzle in their skulls
before I will lose my revenge."
And she laughed a ferocious laugh, that made the hairs on the back of
her black cat stand erect with terror.
Then she went to an old chest in the room, and opening it, took out what
looked like a piece of dried seaweed. This she threw into a tub of
water. Then she threw some powder into the water, and stirred it with
her bare arm, muttering over it words of hideous sound, and yet more
hideous import. Then she set the tub aside, and took from the chest a
huge bunch of a hundred rusty keys, that clattered in her shaking hands.
Then she sat down and proceeded to oil them all. Before she had
finished, out from the tub, the water of which had kept on a slow motion
ever since she had ceased stirring it, came the head and half the body
of a huge gray snake. But the witch did not look round. It grew out of
the tub, waving itself backwards and forwards with a slow horizontal
motion, till it reached the princess, when it laid its head upon her
shoulder, and gave a low hiss in her ear. She started--but with joy; and
seeing the head resting on her shoulder, drew it towards her and kissed
it. Then she drew it all out of the tub, and wound it round her body. It
was one of those dreadful creatures which few have ever beheld--the
White Snakes of Darkness.
Then she took the keys and went down to her cellar; and as she unlocked
the door she said to herself:
"This is worth living for!"
Locking the door behind her, she descended a few steps into the cellar,
and crossing it, unlocked another door into a dark, narrow passage. She
locked this also behind her, and descended a few more steps. If any one
had followed the witch-princess, he would have heard her unlock exactly
one hundred doors, and descend a few steps after unlocking each. When
she had unlocked the last, she entered a vast cave, the roof of which
was supported by huge natural pillars of rock. Now this roof was the
under side of the bottom of the lake.
She then untwined the snake from her body, and held it by the tail high
above her. The hideous creature stretched up its head towards the roof
of the cavern, which it was just able to reach. It then began to move
its head backwards and forwards, with a slow oscillating motion, as if
looking for something. At the same moment the witch began to walk round
and round the cavern, coming nearer to the centre every circuit; while
the head of the snake described the same path over the roof that she did
over the floor, for she kept holding it up. And still it kept slowly
osculating. Round and round the cavern they went, ever lessening the
circuit, till at last the snake made a sudden dart, and clung to the
roof with its mouth.
"That's right, my beauty!" cried the princess; "drain it dry."
She let it go, left it hanging, and sat down on a great stone, with her
black cat, which had followed her all round the cave, by her side. Then
she began to knit and mutter awful words. The snake hung like a huge
leech, sucking at the stone; the cat stood with his back arched, and his
tail like a piece of cable, looking up at the snake; and the old woman
sat and knitted and muttered. Seven days and seven nights they remained
thus; when suddenly the serpent dropped from the roof as if exhausted,
and shrivelled up till it was again like a piece of dried seaweed. The
witch started to her feet, picked it up, put it in her pocket, and
looked up at the roof. One drop of water was trembling on the spot where
the snake had been sucking. As soon as she saw that, she turned and
fled, followed by her cat. Shutting the door in a terrible hurry, she
locked it, and having muttered some frightful words, sped to the next,
which also she locked and muttered over; and so with all the hundred
doors, till she arrived in her own cellar. Then she sat down on the
floor ready to faint, but listening with malicious delight to the
rushing of the water, which she could hear distinctly through all the
hundred doors.
But this was not enough. Now that she had tasted revenge, she lost her
patience. Without further measures, the lake would be too long in
disappearing. So the next night, with the last shred of the dying old
moon rising, she took some of the water in which she had revived the
snake, put it in a bottle, and set out, accompanied by her cat. Before
morning she had made the entire circuit of the lake, muttering fearful
words as she crossed every stream, and casting into it some of the water
out of her bottle. When she had finished the circuit she muttered yet
again, and flung a handful of water towards the moon. Thereupon every
spring in the country ceased to throb and bubble, dying away like the
pulse of a dying man. The next day there was no sound of falling water
to be heard along the borders of the lake. The very courses were dry;
and the mountains showed no silvery streaks down their dark sides. And
not alone had the fountains of mother Earth ceased to flow; for all the
babies throughout the country were crying dreadfully--only without
tears.
XII
Where Is the Prince?
Never since the night when the princess left him so abruptly had the
prince had a single interview with her. He had seen her once or twice in
the lake; but as far as he could discover, she had not been in it any
more at night. He had sat and sung, and looked in vain for his Nereid,
while she, like a true Nereid, was wasting away with her lake, sinking
as it sank, withering as it dried. When at length he discovered the
change that was taking place in the level of the water, he was in great
alarm and perplexity. He could not tell whether the lake was dying
because the lady had forsaken it; or whether the lady would not come
because the lake had begun to sink. But he resolved to know so much at
least.
He disguised himself, and, going to the palace, requested to see the
lord chamberlain. His appearance at once gained his request; and the
lord chamberlain, being a man of some insight, perceived that there was
more in the prince's solicitation than met the ear. He felt likewise
that no one could tell whence a solution of the present difficulties
might arise. So he granted the prince's prayer to be made shoeblack to
the princess. It was rather cunning in the prince to request such an
easy post, for the princess could not possibly soil as many shoes as
other princesses.
He soon learned all that could be told about the princess. He went
nearly distracted; but after roaming about the lake for days, and diving
in every depth that remained, all that he could do was to put an extra
polish on the dainty pair of boots that was never called for.
For the princess kept her room, with the curtains drawn to shut out the
dying lake, but could not shut it out of her mind for a moment. It
haunted her imagination so that she felt as if the lake were her soul,
drying up within her, first to mud, then to madness and death. She thus
brooded over the change, with all its dreadful accompaniments, till she
was nearly distracted. As for the prince, she had forgotten him. However
much she had enjoyed his company in the water, she did not care for him
without it. But she seemed to have forgotten her father and mother too.
The lake went on sinking. Small slimy spots began to appear, which
glittered steadily amidst the changeful shine of the water. These grew
to broad patches of mud, which widened and spread, with rocks here and
there, and floundering fishes and crawling eels swarming. The people
went everywhere catching these, and looking for anything that might have
dropped from the royal boats.
At length the lake was all but gone, only a few of the deepest pools
remaining unexhausted.
It happened one day that a party of youngsters found themselves on the
brink of one of these pools in the very centre of the lake. It was a
rocky basin of considerable depth. Looking in, they saw at the bottom
something that shone yellow in the sun. A little boy jumped in and dived
for it. It was a plate of gold covered with writing. They carried it to
the king.
On one side of it stood these words:
  "Death alone from death can save.
   Love is death, and so is brave.
   Love can fill the deepest grave.
   Love loves on beneath the wave."
Now this was enigmatical enough to the king and courtiers. But the
reverse of the plate explained it a little. Its writing amounted to
this:
"If the lake should disappear, they must find the hole through which the
water ran. But it would be useless to try to stop it by any ordinary
means. There was but one effectual mode. The body of a living man could
alone staunch the flow. The man must give himself of his own will; and
the lake must take his life as it filled. Otherwise the offering would
be of no avail. If the nation could not provide one hero, it was time it
should perish,"
XIII
Here I Am!
This was a very disheartening revelation to the king--not that he was
unwilling to sacrifice a subject, but that he was hopeless of finding a
man willing to sacrifice himself. No time was to be lost however, for
the princess was lying motionless on her bed, and taking no nourishment
but lake-water, which was now none of the best. Therefore the king
caused the contents of the wonderful plate of gold to be published
throughout the country.
No one, however, came forward.
The prince, having gone several days' journey into the forest, to
consult a hermit whom he had met there on his way to Lagobel, knew
nothing of the oracle till his return.
When he had acquainted himself with all the particulars, he sat down and
thought:
"She will die if I don't do it, and life would be nothing to me without
her; so I shall lose nothing by doing it. And life will be as pleasant
to her as ever, for she will soon forget me. And there will be so much
more beauty and happiness in the world! To be sure, I shall not see it."
(Here the poor prince gave a sigh.) "How lovely the lake will be in the
moonlight, with that glorious creature sporting in it like a wild
goddess! It is rather hard to be drowned by inches, though. Let me
see--that will be seventy inches of me to drown." (Here he tried to
laugh, but could not.) "The longer the better, however," he resumed,
"for can I not bargain that the princess shall be beside me all the
time? So I shall see her once more, kiss her perhaps--who knows? and die
looking in her eyes. It will be no death. At least, I shall not feel it.
And to see the lake filling for the beauty again! All right! I am
ready."
He kissed the princess's boot, laid it down, and hurried to the king's
apartment. But feeling, as he went, that anything sentimental would be
disagreeable, he resolved to carry off the whole affair with
nonchalance. So he knocked at the door of the king's counting-house,
where it was all but a capital crime to disturb him.
When the king heard the knock, he started up, and opened the door in a
rage. Seeing only the shoeblack, he drew his sword. This, I am sorry to
say, was his usual mode of asserting his regality when he thought his
dignity was in danger. But the prince was not in the least alarmed.
"Please your majesty, I'm your butler," said he.
"My butler! you lying rascal! What do you mean?"
"I mean, I will cork your big bottle."
"Is the fellow mad?" bawled the king, raising the point of his sword.
"I will put the stopper--plug--what you call it, in your leaky lake,
grand monarch," said the prince.
The king was in such a rage that before he could speak he had time to
cool, and to reflect that it would be great waste to kill the only man
who was willing to be useful in the present emergency, seeing that in
the end the insolent fellow would be as dead as if he had died by his
majesty's own hand.
"Oh!" said he at last, putting up his sword with difficulty, it was so
long; "I am obliged to you, you young fool! Take a glass of wine?"
"No, thank you," replied the prince.
"Very well," said the king. "Would you like to run and see your parents
before you make your experiment?"
"No, thank you," said the prince.
"Then we will go and look for the hole at once," said his majesty, and
proceeded to call some attendants.
"Stop, please your majesty, I have a condition to make," interposed the
prince.
"What!" exclaimed the king, "a condition! and with me! How dare you?"
"As you please," returned the prince, coolly. "I wish your majesty a
good morning,"
"You wretch! I will have you put in a sack, and stuck in the hole."
"Very well, your majesty," replied the prince, becoming a little more
respectful, lest the wrath of the king should deprive him of the
pleasure of dying for the princess. "But what good will that do your
majesty? Please to remember that the oracle says the victim must offer
himself."
"Well, you have offered yourself," retorted the king.
"Yes, upon one condition."
"Condition again!" roared the king, once more drawing his sword.
"Begone! Somebody else will be glad enough to take the honour off your
shoulders."
"Your majesty knows it will not be easy to get another to take my
place."
"Well, what is your condition?" growled the king, feeling that the
prince was right.
"Only this," replied the prince; "that, as I must on no account die
before I am fairly drowned, and the waiting will be rather wearisome,
the princess, your daughter, shall go with me, feed me with her own
hands, and look at me now and then to comfort me; for you must confess
it is rather hard. As soon as the water is up to my eyes, she may go
and be happy, and forget her poor shoeblack."
Here the prince's voice faltered, and he very nearly grew sentimental,
in spite of his resolution.
"Why didn't you tell me before what your condition was? Such a fuss
about nothing!" exclaimed the king.
"Do you grant it?" persisted the prince.
"Of course I do," replied the king.
"Very well. I am ready."
"Go and have some dinner, then, while I set my people to find the
The king ordered out his guards, and gave directions to the officers to
find the hole in the lake at once. So the bed of the lake was marked out
in divisions and thoroughly examined, and in an hour or so the hole was
discovered. It was in the middle of a stone, near the centre of the
lake, in the very pool where the golden plate had been found. It was a
three-cornered hole of no great size. There was water all round the
stone, but very little was flowing through the hole.
XIV
This Is Very Kind of You
The prince went to dress for the occasion, for he was resolved to die
like a prince.
When the princess heard that a man had offered to die for her, she was
so transported that she jumped off the bed, feeble as she was, and
danced about the room for joy. She did not care who the man was; that
was nothing to her. The hole wanted stopping; and if only a man would
do, why, take one. In an hour or two more everything was ready. Her maid
dressed her in haste, and they carried her to the side of the lake. When
she saw it she shrieked, and covered her face with her hands. They bore
her across to the stone, where they had already placed a little boat for
her. The water was not deep enough to float in, but they hoped it would
be, before long. They laid her on cushions, placed in the boat wines and
fruits and other nice things, and stretched a canopy over all.
In a few minutes the prince appeared. The princess recognised him at
once, but did not think it worth while to acknowledge him.
"Here I am," said the prince. "Put me in."
"They told me it was a shoeblack," said the princess.
"So I am," said the prince. "I blacked your little boots three times a
day, because they were all I could get of you. Put me in."
The courtiers did not resent his bluntness, except by saying to each
other that he was taking it out in impudence.
But how was he to be put in? The golden plate contained no instructions
on this point. The prince looked at the hole, and saw but one way. He
put both his legs into it, sitting on the stone, and, stooping forward,
covered the corner that remained open with his two hands. In this
uncomfortable position he resolved to abide his fate, and turning to the
people, said:
"Now you can go."
The king had already gone home to dinner.
"Now you can go," repeated the princess after him, like a parrot.
The people obeyed her and went.
Presently a little wave flowed over the stone, and wetted one of the
prince's knees. But he did not mind it much. He began to sing, and the
song he sang was this:
 "As a world that has no well,
  Darkly bright in forest dell;
  As a world without the gleam
  Of the downward-going stream;
  As a world without the glance
  Of the ocean's fair expanse;
  As a world where never rain
  Glittered on the sunny plain;--
  Such, my heart, thy world would be,
  If no love did flow in thee.
 "As a world without the sound
  Of the rivulets underground;
  Or the bubbling of the spring
  Out of darkness wandering;
  Or the mighty rush and flowing
  Of the river's downward going;
  Or the music-showers that drop
  On the outspread beech's top;
  Or the ocean's mighty voice,
  When his lifted waves rejoice;--Such,
  my soul, thy world would be,
  If no love did sing in thee.
 "Lady, keep thy world's delight,
  Keep the waters in thy sight
  Love hath made me strong to go,
  For thy sake, to realms below,
  Where the water's shine and hum
  Through the darkness never come.
  Let, I pray, one thought of me
  Spring, a little well, in thee;
  Lest thy loveless soul be found
  Like a dry and thirsty ground."
"Sing again, prince. It makes it less tedious," said the princess.
But the prince was too much overcome to sing any more, and a long pause
followed.
"This is very kind of you, prince," said the princess at last, quite
coolly, as she lay in the boat with her eyes shut.
"I am sorry I can't return the compliment," thought the prince, "but you
are worth dying for, after all."
Again a wavelet, and another, and another flowed over the stone, and
wetted both the prince's knees; but he did not speak or move.
Two--three--four hours passed in this way, the princess apparently
asleep, and the prince very patient. But he was much disappointed in his
position, for he had none of the consolation he had hoped for.
At last he could bear it no longer.
"Princess!" said he.
But at the moment up started the princess, crying:
"I'm afloat! I'm afloat!"
And the little boat bumped against the stone.
"Princess!" repeated the prince, encouraged by seeing her wide awake and
looking eagerly at the water.
"Well?" said she, without looking round.
"Your papa promised that you should look at me, and you haven't looked
at me once."
"Did he? Then I suppose I must. But I am so sleepy!"
"Sleep, then, darling, and don't mind me," said the poor prince.
"Really, you are very good," replied the princess. "I think I will go to
sleep again."
"Just give me a glass of wine and a biscuit first," said the prince,
very humbly.
"With all my heart," said the princess, and yawned as she said it.
She got the wine and the biscuit, however, and leaning over the side of
the boat towards him, was compelled to look at him.
"Why, prince," she said, "you don't look well! Are you sure you don't
mind it?"
"Not a bit," answered he, feeling very faint indeed. "Only I shall die
before it is of any use to you, unless I have something to eat,"
"There, then," said she, holding out the wine to him.
"Ah! you must feed me. I dare not move my hands. The water would run
away directly."
"Good gracious!" said the princess; and she began at once to feed him
with bits of biscuit and sips of wine.
As she fed him, he contrived to kiss the tips of her fingers now and
then. She did not seem to mind it, one way or the other. But the prince
felt better.
"Now, for your own sake, princess," said he, "I cannot let you go to
sleep. You must sit and look at me, else I shall not be able to keep
up."
"Well, I will do anything to oblige you," answered she, with
condescension; and, sitting down, she did look at him, and kept looking
at him with wonderful steadiness, considering all things.
The sun went down, and the moon rose, and, gush after gush, the waters
were rising up the prince's body. They were up to his waist now.
"Why can't we go and have a swim?" said the princess. "There seems to be
water enough just about here."
"I shall never swim more," said the prince.
"Oh, I forgot," said the princess, and was silent.
So the water grew and grew, and rose up and up on the prince. And the
princess sat and looked at him. She fed him now and then. The night wore
on. The waters rose and rose. The moon rose likewise higher and higher,
and shone full on the face of the dying prince. The water was up to his
neck.
"Will you kiss me, princess?" said he, feebly. The nonchalance was all
gone now.
"Yes, I will," answered the princess, and kissed him with a long, sweet,
cold kiss.
"Now," said he, with a sigh of content, "I die happy."
He did not speak again. The princess gave him some wine for the last
time: he was past eating. Then she sat down again, and looked at him.
The water rose and rose. It touched his chin. It touched his lower lip.
It touched between his lips. He shut them hard to keep it out. The
princess began to feel strange. It touched his upper lip. He breathed
through his nostrils. The princess looked wild. It covered his nostrils.
Her eyes looked scared, and shone strange in the moonlight. His head
fell back; the water closed over it, and the bubbles of his last breath
bubbled up through the water. The princess gave a shriek, and sprang
into the lake.
She laid hold first of one leg, and then of the other, and pulled and
tugged, but she could not move either. She stopped to take breath, and
that made her think that he could not get any breath. She was frantic.
She got hold of him, and held his head above the water, which was
possible now his hands were no longer on the hole. But it was of no use,
for he was past breathing.
Love and water brought back all her strength. She got under the water,
and pulled and pulled with her whole might, till at last she got one leg
out. The other easily followed. How she got him into the boat she never
could tell; but when she did, she fainted away. Coming to herself, she
seized the oars, kept herself steady as best she could, and rowed and
rowed, though she had never rowed before. Round rocks, and over
shallows, and through mud she rowed, till she got to the landing-stairs
of the palace. By this time her people were on the shore, for they had
heard her shriek. She made them carry the prince to her own room, and
lay him in her bed, and light a fire, and send for the doctors.
"But the lake, your highness!" said the chamberlain, who, roused by the
noise, came in, in his nightcap.
"Go and drown yourself in it!" she said.
This was the last rudeness of which the princess was ever guilty; and
one must allow that she had good cause to feel provoked with the lord
chamberlain.
Had it been the king himself, he would have fared no better. But both he
and the queen were fast asleep. And the chamberlain went back to his
bed. Somehow, the doctors never came. So the princess and her old nurse
were left with the prince. But the old nurse was a wise woman, and knew
what to do.
They tried everything for a long time without success. The princess was
nearly distracted between hope and fear, but she tried on and on, one
thing after another, and everything over and over again.
At last, when they had all but given it up, just as the sun rose, the
prince opened his eyes.
XV
Look at the Rain!
The princess burst into a passion of tears and fell on the floor.
There she lay for an hour, and her tears never ceased. All the pent-up
crying of her life was spent now. And a rain came on, such as had never
been seen in that country. The sun shone all the time, and the great
drops, which fell straight to the earth, shone likewise. The palace was
in the heart of a rainbow. It was a rain of rubies, and sapphires, and
emeralds, and topazes. The torrents poured from the mountains like
molten gold; and if it had not been for its subterraneous outlet, the
lake would have overflowed and inundated the country. It was full from
shore to shore.
But the princess did not heed the lake. She lay on the floor and wept.
And this rain within doors was far more wonderful than the rain out of
doors. For when it abated a little, and she proceeded to rise, she
found, to her astonishment, that she could not. At length, after many
efforts, she succeeded in getting upon her feet. But she tumbled down
again directly. Hearing her fall, her old nurse uttered a yell of
delight, and ran to her, screaming:
"My darling child! she's found her gravity!"
"Oh, that's it! is it?" said the princess, rubbing her shoulder and her
knee alternately. "I consider it very unpleasant. I feel as if I should
be crushed to pieces."
"Hurrah!" cried the prince from the bed. "If you've come round,
princess, so have I. How's the lake?"
"Brimful," answered the nurse.
"Then we're all happy."
"That we are indeed!" answered the princess, sobbing.
And there was rejoicing all over the country that rainy day. Even the
babies forgot their past troubles, and danced and crowed amazingly. And
the king told stories, and the queen listened to them. And he divided
the money in his box, and she the honey in her pot, among all the
children. And there was such jubilation as was never heard of before.
Of course the prince and princess were betrothed at once. But the
princess had to learn to walk, before they could be married with any
propriety. And this was not so easy at her time of life, for she could
walk no more than a baby. She was always falling down and hurting
herself.
"Is this the gravity you used to make so much of?" said she one day to
the prince, as he raised her from the floor. "For my part, I was a great
deal more comfortable without it."
"No, no, that's not it. This is it," replied the prince, as he took her
up, and carried her about like a baby, kissing her all the time. "This
is gravity."
"That's better," said she. "I don't mind that so much."
And she smiled the sweetest, loveliest smile in the prince's face. And
she gave him one little kiss in return for all his; and he thought them
overpaid, for he was beside himself with delight. I fear she complained
of her gravity more than once after this, notwithstanding.
It was a long time before she got reconciled to walking. But the pain of
learning it was quite counterbalanced by two things, either of which
would have been sufficient consolation. The first was, that the prince
himself was her teacher; and the second, that she could tumble into the
lake as often as she pleased. Still, she preferred to have the prince
jump in with her; and the splash they made before was nothing to the
splash they made now.
The lake never sank again. In process of time it wore the roof of the
cavern quite through, and was twice as deep as before.
The only revenge the princess took upon her aunt was to tread pretty
hard on her gouty toe the next time she saw her. But she was sorry for
it the very next day, when she heard that the water had undermined her
house, and that it had fallen in the night, burying her in its ruins;
whence no one ever ventured to dig up her body. There she lies to this
day.
So the prince and princess lived and were happy; and had crowns of gold,
and clothes of cloth, and shoes of leather, and children of boys and
girls, not one of whom was ever known, on the most critical occasion, to
lose the smallest atom of his or her due proportion of gravity.
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST
There was once a very rich merchant, who had six children, three boys
and three girls. As he was himself a man of great sense, he spared no
expense for their education, but provided them with all sorts of masters
for their improvement. The three daughters were all handsome, but
particularly the youngest: indeed she was so very beautiful that in her
childhood every one called her the Little Beauty, and being still the
same when she was grown up, nobody called her by any other name, which
made her sisters very jealous of her. This youngest daughter was not
only more handsome than her sisters, but was also better tempered. The
two eldest were vain of being rich, and spoke with pride to those they
thought below them. They gave themselves a thousand airs, and would not
visit other merchants' daughters; nor would they indeed be seen with any
but persons of quality. They went every day to balls, plays, and public
walks, and always made game of their youngest sister for spending her
time in reading, or other useful employments. As it was well known that
these young ladies would have large fortunes, many great merchants
wished to get them for wives; but the two eldest always answered that,
for their parts, they had no thoughts of marrying any one below a duke,
or an earl at least. Beauty had quite as many offers as her sisters, but
she always answered with the greatest civility, that she was much
obliged to her lovers, but would rather live some years longer with her
father, as she thought herself too young to marry.
It happened that by some unlucky accident the merchant suddenly lost all
his fortune, and had nothing left but a small cottage in the country.
Upon this, he said to his daughters, while the tears ran down his cheeks
all the time, "My children, we must now go and dwell in the cottage, and
try to get a living by labour, for we have no other means of support."
The two eldest replied that, for their parts, they did not know how to
work, and would not leave town; for they had lovers enough who would be
glad to marry them, though they had no longer any fortune. But in this
they were mistaken; for when the lovers heard what had happened, they
said, "The girls were so proud and ill-tempered, that all we wanted was
their fortune; we are not sorry at all to see their pride brought down.
Let them give themselves airs to their cows and sheep." But every body
pitied poor Beauty, because she was so sweet-tempered and kind to all
that knew her; and several gentlemen offered to marry her, though she
had not a penny; but Beauty still refused, and said she could not think
of leaving her poor father in this trouble and would go and help him in
his labours in the country. At first Beauty could not help sometimes
crying in secret for the hardships she was now obliged to suffer; but in
a very short time she said to herself, "All the crying in the world will
do me no good, so I will try to be happy without a fortune."
When they had removed to their cottage, the merchant and his three sons
employed themselves in ploughing and sowing the fields, and working in
the garden. Beauty also did her part, for she got up by four o'clock
every morning, lighted the fires, cleaned the house, and got the
breakfast for the whole family. At first she found all this very hard;
but she soon grew quite used to it, and thought it no hardship at all;
and indeed the work greatly amended her health. When she had done, she
used to amuse herself with reading, playing on her music, or singing
while she spun. But her two sisters were at a loss what to do to pass
the time away: they had their breakfast in bed, and did not rise till
ten o'clock. Then they commonly walked out; but always found themselves
very soon tired; when they would often sit down under a shady tree, and
grieve for the loss of their carriage and fine clothes, and say to each
other, "What a mean-spirited poor stupid creature our young sister is,
to be so content with our low way of life!" But their father thought in
quite another way: he admired the patience of this sweet young creature;
for her sisters not only left her to do the whole work of the house, but
made game of her every moment.
After they had lived in this manner about a year, the merchant received
a letter, which informed him that one of the richest ships, which he
thought was lost, had just come into port. This news made the two eldest
sisters almost mad with joy; for they thought they should now leave the
cottage, and have all their finery again. When they found that their
father must take a journey to the ship, the two eldest begged he would
not fail to bring them back some new gowns, caps, rings, and all sorts
of trinkets. But Beauty asked for nothing; for she thought in herself
that all the ship was worth would hardly buy every thing her sisters
wished for. "Beauty," said the merchant, "how comes it about that you
ask for nothing; what can I bring you, my child?" "Since you are so kind
as to think of me, dear father," she answered, "I should be glad if you
would bring me a rose, for we have none in our garden." Now Beauty did
not indeed wish for a rose, nor any thing else, but she only said this,
that she might not affront her sisters, for else they would have said
she wanted her father to praise her for not asking him for any thing.
The merchant took his leave of them and set out on his journey; but when
he got to the ship, some persons went to law with him about the cargo,
and after a deal of trouble, he came back to his cottage as poor as he
had gone away. When he was within thirty miles of his home, and thinking
of the joy he should have in again meeting his children, his road lay
through a thick forest, and he quite lost himself. It rained and snowed
very hard, and besides, the wind was so high as to throw him twice from
his horse. Night came on, and he thought to be sure he should die of
cold and hunger, or be torn to pieces by the wolves that he heard
howling round him. All at once, he now cast his eyes towards a long row
of trees, and saw a light at the end of them, but it seemed a great way
off. He made the best of his way towards it, and found that it came from
a fine palace, lighted all over. He walked faster, and soon reached the
gates, which he opened, and was very much surprised that he did not see
a single person or creature in any of the yards. His horse had followed
him, and finding a stable with the door open, went into it at once; and
here the poor beast, being nearly starved, helped himself to a good meal
of oats and hay. His master then tied him up, and walked towards the
house, which he entered, but still without seeing a living creature. He
went on to a large hall, where he found a good fire, and a table covered
with some very nice dishes, and only one plate with a knife and fork. As
the snow and rain had wetted him to the skin, he went up to the fire to
dry himself. "I hope," said he, "the master of the house or his servants
will excuse me, for to be sure it will not be long now before I see
them." He waited a good time, but still nobody came: at last the clock
struck eleven, and the merchant, being quite faint for the want of food,
helped himself to a chicken, which he made but two mouthfuls of, and
then to a few glasses of wine, yet all the time trembling with fear. He
sat till the clock struck twelve, but did not see a single creature. He
now took courage, and began to think of looking a little more about him;
so he opened a door at the end of the hall, and went through it into a
very grand room, In which there was a fine bed; and as he was quite weak
and tired, he shut the door, took off his clothes, and got into it.
It was ten o'clock in the morning before he thought of getting up, when
he was amazed to see a handsome new suit of clothes laid ready for him,
instead of his own, which he had spoiled. "To be sure," said he to
himself, "this place belongs to some good fairy, who has taken pity on
my ill luck." He looked out of the window, and, instead of snow, he saw
the most charming arbours covered with all kinds of flowers. He returned
to the hall, where he had supped, and found a breakfast table, with some
chocolate got ready for him. "Indeed, my good fairy," said the merchant
aloud, "I am vastly obliged to you for your kind care of me." He then
made a hearty breakfast, took his hat, and was going to the stable to
pay his horse a visit; but as he passed under one of the arbours, which
was loaded with roses, he thought of what Beauty had asked him to bring
back to her, and so he took a bunch of roses to carry home. At the same
moment he heard a most shocking noise, and saw such a frightful beast
coming towards him, that he was ready to drop with fear. "Ungrateful
man!" said the beast, in a terrible voice, "I have saved your life by
letting you into my palace, and in return you steal my roses, which I
value more than any thing else that belongs to me. But you shall make
amends for your fault with your life. You shall die in a quarter of an
hour." The merchant fell on his knees to the beast, and clasping his
hands, said, "My lord, I humbly beg your pardon. I did not think it
would offend you to gather a rose for one of my daughters, who wished to
have one." "I am not a lord, but a beast," replied the monster; "I do
not like false compliments, but that people should say what they think:
so do not fancy that you can coax me by any such ways. You tell me that
you have daughters; now I will pardon you, if one of them will agree to
come and die instead of you. Go; and if your daughters should refuse,
promise me that you yourself will return in three months."
The tender-hearted merchant had no thought of letting any one of his
daughters die instead of him; but he knew that if he seemed to accept
the beast's terms, he should at least have the pleasure of seeing them
once again. So he gave the beast his promise; and the beast told him he
might then set off as soon as he liked. "But," said the beast, "I do not
wish you to go back empty-handed. Go to the room you slept in, and you
will find a chest there; fill it with just what you like best, and I
will get it taken to your own house for you," When the beast had said
this, he went away; and the good merchant said to himself, "If I must
die, yet I shall now have the comfort of leaving my children some
riches," He returned to the room he had slept in, and found a great many
pieces of gold. He filled the chest with them to the very brim, locked
it, and mounting his horse, left the palace as sorry as he had been glad
when he first found it. The horse took a path across the forest of his
own accord, and in a few hours they reached the merchant's house. His
children came running round him as he got off his horse; but the
merchant, instead of kissing them with joy, could not help crying as he
looked at them. He held in his hand the bunch of roses, which he gave to
Beauty, saying: "Take these roses, Beauty; but little do you think how
dear they have cost your poor father;" and then he gave them an account
of all that he had seen or heard in the palace of the beast. The two
eldest sisters now began to shed tears, and to lay the blame upon
Beauty, who they said would be the cause of her father's death "See,"
said they, "what happens from the pride of the little wretch. Why did
not she ask for fine things as we did? But, to be sure, miss must not be
like other people; and though she will be the cause of her father's
death, yet she does not shed a tear." "It would be of no use," replied
Beauty, "to weep for the death of my father, for he shall not die now.
As the beast will accept of one of his daughters, I will give myself up
to him; and think myself happy in being able at once to save his life,
and prove my love for the best of fathers." "No, sister," said the three
brothers, "you shall not die; we will go in search for this monster, and
either he or we will perish." "Do not hope to kill him," said the
merchant, "for his power is far too great for you to be able to do any
such thing. I am charmed with the kindness of Beauty, but I will not
suffer her life to be lost. I myself am old, and cannot expect to live
much longer; so I shall but give up a few years of my life, and shall
only grieve for the sake of my children." "Never, father," cried Beauty,
"shall you go to the palace without me; for you cannot hinder my going
after you. Though young, I am not over fond of life; and I would much
rather be eaten up by the monster, than die of the grief your loss would
give me." The merchant tried in vain to reason with Beauty, for she
would go; which, in truth, made her two sisters glad, for they were
jealous of her, because everybody loved her.
The merchant was so grieved at the thoughts of losing his child, that he
never once thought of the chest filled with gold; but at night, to his
great surprise, he found it standing by his bedside. He said nothing
about his riches to his eldest daughters, for he knew very well it would
at once make them want to return to town; but he told Beauty his secret,
and she then said, that while he was away, two gentlemen had been on a
visit to their cottage, who had fallen in love with her two sisters. She
then begged her father to marry them without delay; for she was so
sweet-tempered, that she loved them for all they had used her so ill,
and forgave them with all her heart. When the three months were past,
the merchant and Beauty got ready to set out for the palace of the
beast. Upon this, the two sisters rubbed their eyes with an onion, to
make believe they shed a great many tears; but both the merchant and his
sons cried in earnest. There was only Beauty who did not, for she
thought that this would only make the matter worse. They reached the
palace in a very few hours, and the horse, without bidding, went into
the same stable as before. The merchant and Beauty walked towards the
large hall, where they found a table covered with every dainty, and two
plates laid ready. The merchant had very little appetite; but Beauty,
that she might the better hide her grief, placed herself at the table,
and helped her father; she then began herself to eat, and thought all
the time that to be sure the beast had a mind to fatten her before he
eat her up, as he had got such good cheer for her. When they had done
their supper, they heard a great noise, and the good old man began to
bid his poor child farewell, for he knew it was the beast coming to
them. When Beauty first saw his frightful form, she could not help being
afraid; but she tried to hide her fear as much as she could. The beast
asked her if she had come quite of her own accord, and though she was
now still more afraid than before, she made shift to say, "Y-e-s." "You
are a good girl, and I think myself very much obliged to you." He then
turned towards her father, and said to him, "Good man, you may leave the
palace to-morrow morning, and take care never to come back to it again.
Good night, Beauty." "Good night, beast," said she; and then the monster
went out of the room.
"Ah! my dear child," said the merchant, kissing his daughter, "I am half
dead already, at the thoughts of leaving you with this dreadful beast;
you had better go back, and let me stay in your place." "No," said
Beauty boldly, "I will never agree to that; you must go home to-morrow
morning." They then wished each other good night, and went to bed, both
of them thinking they should not be able to close their eyes; but as
soon as ever they had laid down, they fell into a deep sleep, and did
not wake till morning. Beauty dreamed that a lady came up to her, who
said, "I am very much pleased, Beauty, with the goodness you have shown,
in being willing to give your life to save that of your father; and it
shall not go without a reward." As soon as Beauty awoke, she told her
father this dream; but though it gave him some comfort, he could not
take leave of his darling child without shedding many tears. When the
merchant got out of sight, Beauty sat down in the large hall, and began
to cry also; yet she had a great deal of courage, and so she soon
resolved not to make her sad case still worse by sorrow, which she knew
could not be of any use to her, but to wait as well as she could till
night, when she thought the beast would not fail to come and eat her up.
She walked about to take a view of all the palace, and the beauty of
every part of it much charmed her.
But what was her surprise, when she came to a door on which was written,
Beauty's room! She opened it in haste, and her eyes were all at once
dazzled at the grandeur of the inside of the room. What made her wonder
more than all the rest was a large library filled with books, a
harpsichord, and many other pieces of music. "The beast takes care I
shall not be at a loss how to amuse myself," said she. She then thought
that it was not likely such things would have been got ready for her, if
she had but one day to live; and began to hope all would not turn out so
bad as she and her father had feared. She opened the library, and saw
these verses written in letters of gold on the back of one of the books:
  "Beauteous lady, dry your tears,
   Here's no cause for sighs or fears;
   Command as freely as you may,
   Enjoyment still shall mark your sway."
"Alas!" said she, sighing, "there is nothing I so much desire as to see
my poor father and to know what he is doing at this moment," She said
this to herself; but just then by chance, she cast her eyes on a
looking-glass that stood near her, and in the glass she saw her home,
and her father riding up to the cottage in the deepest sorrow. Her
sisters came out to meet him, but for all they tried to look sorry, it
was easy to see that in their hearts they were very glad. In a short
time all this picture went away out of the glass: but Beauty began to
think that the beast was very kind to her, and that she had no need to
be afraid of him. About the middle of the day, she found a table laid
ready for her; and a sweet concert of music played all the time she was
eating her dinner without her seeing a single creature. But at supper,
when she was going to seat herself at table, she heard the noise of the
beast, and could not help trembling with fear. "Beauty," said he, "will
you give me leave to see you sup?" "That is as you please," answered
she, very much afraid. "Not in the least," said the beast; "you alone
command in this place. If you should not like my company, you need only
to say so, and I will leave you that moment. But tell me, Beauty, do you
not think me very ugly?" "Why, yes," said she, "for I cannot tell a
story; but then I think you are very good." "You are right," replied the
beast; "and, besides being ugly, I am also very stupid: I know very well
enough that I am but a beast."
"I should think you cannot be very stupid," said Beauty, "if you
yourself know this." "Pray do not let me hinder you from eating," said
he; "and be sure you do not want for any thing; for all you see is
yours, and I shall be vastly grieved if you are not happy." "You are
very kind," said Beauty: "I must needs own that I think very well of
your good nature, and then I almost forget how ugly you are." "Yes, yes,
I hope I am good-tempered," said he, "but still I am a monster." "There
are many men who are worse monsters than you are," replied Beauty; "and
I am better pleased with you in that form, though it is so ugly, than
with those who carry wicked hearts under the form of a man." "If I had
any sense," said the beast, "I would thank you for what you have said;
but I am too stupid to say any thing that would give you pleasure."
Beauty ate her supper with a very good appetite, and almost lost all her
dread of the monster; but she was ready to sink with fright, when he
said to her, "Beauty, will you be my wife?" For a few minutes she was
not able to speak a word, for she was afraid of putting him in a
passion, by refusing. At length she said, "No, beast." The beast made no
reply, but sighed deeply, and went away. When Beauty found herself
alone, she began to feel pity for the poor beast. "Dear!" said she,
"what a sad thing it is that he should be so very frightful, since he is
so good-tempered!"
Beauty lived three months in this palace, very well pleased. The beast
came to see her every night, and talked with her while she supped; and
though what he said was not very clever, yet as she saw in him every day
some new mark of his goodness, so instead of dreading the time of his
coming, she was always looking at her watch, to see if it was almost
nine o'clock; for that was the time when he never failed to visit her.
There was but one thing that vexed her; which was that every night,
before the beast went away from her, he always made it a rule to ask her
if she would be his wife, and seemed very much grieved at her saying no.
At last, one night, she said to him, "You vex me greatly, beast, by
forcing me to refuse you so often; I wish I could take such a liking to
you as to agree to marry you, but I must tell you plainly, that I do not
think it will ever happen. I shall always be your friend; so try to let
that make you easy." "I must needs do so then," said the beast, "for I
know well enough how frightful I am; but I love you better than myself.
Yet I think I am very lucky in your being pleased to stay with me; now
promise me, Beauty, that you will never leave me." Beauty was quite
struck when he said this, for that very day she had seen in her glass
that her father had fallen sick of grief for her sake, and was very ill
for the want of seeing her again. "I would promise you, with all my
heart," said she, "never to leave you quite; but I long so much to see
my father, that if you do not give me leave to visit him I shall die
with grief." "I would rather die myself, Beauty," answered the beast,
"than make you fret; I will send you to your father's cottage, you shall
stay there, and your poor beast shall die of sorrow." "No," said Beauty,
crying, "I love you too well to be the cause of your death; I promise to
return in a week. You have shown me that my sisters are married, and my
brothers are gone for soldiers, so that my father is left all alone. Let
me stay a week with him." "You shall find yourself with him to-morrow
morning," replied the beast; "but mind, do not forget your promise. When
you wish to return you have nothing to do but to put your ring on a
table when you go to bed. Good-bye, Beauty!" The beast then sighed as he
said these words, and Beauty went to bed very sorry to see him so much
grieved. When she awoke in the morning, she found herself in her
father's cottage. She rung a bell that was at her bedside, and a servant
entered; but as soon as she saw Beauty, the woman gave a loud shriek;
upon which the merchant ran up stairs, and when he beheld his daughter
he was ready to die of joy. He ran to the bedside, and kissed her a
hundred times. At last Beauty began to remember that she had brought no
clothes with her to put on; but the servant told her she had just found
in the next room a large chest full of dresses, trimmed all over with
gold, and adorned with pearls and diamonds.
Beauty in her own mind thanked the beast for his kindness, and put on
the plainest gown she could find among them all. She then told the
servant to put the rest away with a great deal of care, for she intended
to give them to her sisters; but as soon as she had spoken these words
the chest was gone out of sight in a moment. Her father then said,
perhaps the beast chose for her to keep them all for herself; and as
soon as he had said this, they saw the chest standing again in the same
place. While Beauty was dressing herself, a servant brought word to her
that her sisters were come with their husbands to pay her a visit. They
both lived unhappily with the gentlemen they had married. The husband of
the eldest was very handsome; but was so very proud of this, that he
thought of nothing else from morning till night, and did not attend to
the beauty of his wife. The second had married a man of great learning;
but he made no use of it, only to torment and affront all his friends,
and his wife more than any of them. The two sisters were ready to burst
with spite when they saw Beauty dressed like a princess, and look so
very charming. All the kindness that she showed them was of no use; for
they were vexed more than ever, when she told them how happy she lived
at the palace of the beast. The spiteful creatures went by themselves
into the garden, where they cried to think of her good fortune. "Why
should the little wretch be better off than we?" said they. "We are much
handsomer than she is." "Sister," said the eldest, "a thought has just
come into my head: let us try to keep her here longer than the week that
the beast gave her leave for: and then he will be so angry, that perhaps
he will eat her up in a moment." "That is well thought of," answered the
other, "but to do this we must seem very kind to her." They then made up
their minds to be so, and went to join her in the cottage where they
showed her so much false love, that Beauty could not help crying for
joy.
When the week was ended, the two sisters began to pretend so much grief
at the thoughts of her leaving them, that she agreed to stay a week
more; but all that time Beauty could not help fretting for the sorrow
that she knew her staying would give her poor beast; for she tenderly
loved him, and much wished for his company again. The tenth night of her
being at the cottage she dreamed she was in the garden of the palace,
and that the beast lay dying on a grass plot, and, with his last breath,
put her in mind of her promise, and laid his death to her keeping away
from him; Beauty awoke in a great fright, and burst into tears. "Am not
I wicked," said she, "to behave so ill to a beast who has shown me so
much kindness; why will I not marry him? I am sure I should be more
happy with him than my sisters are with their husbands. He shall not be
wretched any longer on my account; for I should do nothing but blame
myself all the rest of my life,"
She then rose, put her ring on the table, got into bed again, and soon
fell asleep. In the morning she with joy found herself in the palace of
the beast. She dressed herself very finely, that she might please him
the better, and thought she had never known a day pass away so slow. At
last the clock struck nine, but the beast did not come. Beauty then
thought to be sure she had been the cause of his death in earnest. She
ran from room to room all over the palace, calling out his name, but
still she saw nothing of him. After looking for him a long time, she
thought of her dream, and ran directly towards the grass plot; and there
she found the poor beast lying senseless and seeming dead. She threw
herself upon his body, thinking nothing at all of his ugliness; and
finding his heart still beat, she ran and fetched some water from a pond
in the garden, and threw it on his face. The beast then opened his eyes,
and said: "You have forgot your promise, Beauty. My grief for the loss
of you has made me resolve to starve myself to death; but I shall die
content, since I have had the pleasure of seeing you once more." "No,
dear beast," replied Beauty, "you shall not die; you shall live to be my
husband: from this moment I offer to marry you, and will be only yours.
Oh! I thought I felt only friendship for you; but the pain I now feel,
shows me that I could not live without seeing you."
The moment Beauty had spoken these words, the palace was suddenly
lighted up, and music, fireworks, and all kinds of rejoicings, appeared
round about them. Yet Beauty took no notice of all this, but watched
over her dear beast with the greatest tenderness. But now she was all at
once amazed to see at her feet, instead of her poor beast, the
handsomest prince that ever was seen, who thanked her most warmly for
having broken his enchantment. Though this young prince deserved all her
notice, she could not help asking him what was become of the beast. "You
see him at your feet, Beauty," answered the prince, "for I am he. A
wicked fairy had condemned me to keep the form of a beast till a
beautiful young lady should agree to marry me, and ordered me, on pain
of death, not to show that I had any sense. You, alone, dearest Beauty,
have kindly judged of me by the goodness of my heart; and in return I
offer you my hand and my crown, though I know the reward is much less
than what I owe you." Beauty, in the most pleasing surprise, helped the
prince to rise, and they walked along to the palace, when her wonder was
very great to find her father and sisters there, who had been brought by
the lady Beauty had seen in her dream. "Beauty," said the lady (for she
was a fairy), "receive the reward of the choice you have made. You have
chosen goodness of heart rather than sense and beauty; therefore you
deserve to find them all three joined in the same person. You are going
to be a great Queen: I hope a crown will not destroy your virtue."
"As for you, ladies," said the fairy to the other two sisters, "I have
long known the malice of your hearts, and the wrongs you have done. You
shall become two statues; but under that form you shall still keep your
reason, and shall be fixed at the gates of your sister's palace; and I
will not pass any worse sentence on you than to see her happy. You will
never appear in your own persons again till you are fully cured of your
faults; and to tell the truth, I am very much afraid you will remain
statues for ever."
At the same moment, the fairy, with a stroke of her wand, removed all
who were present to the young prince's country, where he was received
with the greatest joy by his subjects. He married Beauty, and passed a
long and happy life with her, because they still kept in the same course
of goodness from which they had never departed.
An old queen, whose husband had been dead some years, had a beautiful
daughter. When she grew up, she was betrothed to a prince who lived
a great way off; and as the time drew near for her to be married, she
got ready to set off on her journey to his country. Then the queen,
her mother, packed up a great many costly things--jewels, and gold,
and silver; trinkets, fine dresses, and, in short, everything that
became a royal bride; for she loved her child very dearly: and she
gave her a waiting-maid to ride with her, and give her into the
bridegroom's hands; and each had a horse for the journey. Now the
princess's horse was called Falada, and could speak.
When the time came for them to set out, the old queen went into her
bed-chamber, and took a little knife, and cut off a lock of her hair,
and gave it to her daughter, and said, "Take care of it, dear child;
for it is a charm that may be of use to you on the road." Then they
took a sorrowful leave of each other, and the princess put the lock of
her mother's hair into her bosom, got upon her horse, and set off on
her journey to her bridegroom's kingdom. One day, as they were riding
along by the side of a brook, the princess began to feel very thirsty,
and said to her maid, "Pray get down and fetch me some water, in my
golden cup, out of yonder brook, for I want to drink." "Nay," said
the maid, "if you are thirsty, get down yourself, and lie down by the
water and drink; I shall not be your waiting-maid any longer." Then
the princess was so thirsty that she got down, and knelt over the
brook and drank, for she was frightened, and dared not bring out her
golden cup; and then she wept, and said "Alas! what will become of
me?" And the lock of hair answered her, and said--
      "Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
      Sadly, sadly her heart would rue it."
But the princess was very humble and meek, so she said nothing to her
maid's ill behaviour, but got upon her horse again.
Then all rode further on their journey, till the day grew so warm, and
the sun so scorching, that the bride began to feel very thirsty again;
and at last, when they came to a river, she forgot her maid's rude
speech, and said, "Pray get down and fetch me some water to drink
in my golden cup." But the maid answered her, and even spoke more
haughtily than before, "Drink, if you will, but I shall not be your
waiting-maid." Then the princess was so thirsty that she got off her
horse and lay down, and held her head over the running stream, and
cried, and said, "What will become of me?" And the lock of hair
answered her again--
And as she leaned down to drink, the lock of hair fell from her bosom
and floated away with the water, without her seeing it, she was so
frightened. But her maid saw it, and was very glad, for she knew the
charm, and saw that the poor bride would be in her power now that she
had lost the hair. So when the bride had drunk, and would have got
upon Falada again, the maid said, "I shall ride upon Falada and you
may have my horse instead;" so she was forced to give up her horse,
and soon afterwards to take off her royal clothes, and put on her
maid's shabby ones.
At last, as they drew near the end of the journey, this treacherous
servant threatened to kill her mistress if she ever told anyone what
had happened. But Falada saw it all, and marked it well. Then the
waiting-maid got upon Falada, and the real bride was set upon the
other horse, and they went on in this way till at last they came
to the royal court. There was great joy at their coming, the prince
hurried to meet them, and lifted the maid from her horse, thinking she
was the one who was to be his wife; and she was led upstairs to the
royal chamber, but the true princess was told to stay in the court
below.
[Illustration]
But the old king happened to be looking out of the window, and saw her
in the yard below; and as she looked very pretty, and too delicate for
a waiting-maid, he went into the royal chamber to ask the bride who it
was she had brought with her, that was thus left standing in the
court below. "I brought her with me for the sake of her company on the
road," said she. "Pray give the girl some work to do, that she may not
be idle." The old king could not for some time think of any work for
her to do, but at last he said, "I have a lad who takes care of my
geese; she may go and help him." Now the name of this lad, that the
real bride was to help in watching the king's geese, was Curdken.
Soon after, the false bride said to the prince, "Dear husband pray do
me one piece of kindness." "That I will," said the prince. "Then tell
one of your slaughterers to cut off the head of the horse I rode upon,
for it was very unruly, and plagued me sadly on the road." But the
truth was, she was very much afraid lest Falada should speak, and
tell all she had done to the princess. She carried her point, and the
faithful Falada was killed; but when the true princess heard of it she
wept, and begged the man to nail up Falada's head against a large
dark gate in the city through which she had to pass every morning
and evening, that there she might still see him sometimes. Then the
slaughterer said he would do as she wished; cut off the head, and
nailed it fast under the dark gate.
Early the next morning, as she and Curdken went out through the gate,
she said sorrowfully--
      "Falada, Falada, there thou art hanging!"
and the head answered--
      "Bride, bride, there thou art ganging!
      Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
Then they went out of the city, and drove the geese in. And when she
came to the meadow, she sat down upon a bank here, and let down her
waving locks of hair, which were all of pure gold; and when Curdken
saw it glitter in the sun, he ran up, and would have pulled some of
the locks out; but she cried--
      "Blow, breezes, blow!
      Let Curdken's hat go!
      Blow, breezes, blow!
      Let him after it go!
      O'er hills, dales, and rocks.
      Away be it whirl'd,
      Till the golden locks
      Are all comb'd and curl'd!"
Then there came a wind, so strong that it blew off Curdken's hat, and
away it flew over the hills, and he after it; till, by the time he
came back, she had done combing and curling her hair, and put it up
again safe. Then he was very angry and sulky, and would not speak
to her at all; but they watched the geese until it grew dark in the
evening, and then drove them homewards.
The next morning, as they were going through the dark gate, the poor
girl looked up at Falada's head, and cried--
and it answered--
Then she drove on the geese and sat down again in the meadow, and
began to comb out her hair as before, and Curdken ran up to her, and
wanted to take hold of it; but she cried out quickly--
      Let Curdken's hat go,
      O'er hills, dales, and rocks,
Then the wind came and blew his hat, and off it flew a great way, over
the hills and far away, so that he had to run after it; and when he
came back, she had done up her hair again, and all was safe. So they
watched the geese till it grew dark.
In the evening, after they came home, Curdken went to the old king,
and said, "I cannot have that strange girl to help me to keep the
geese any longer."
"Why?" said the king.
"Because she does nothing but tease me all day long."
Then the king made him tell all that had passed.
And Curdken said, "When we go in the morning through the dark gate
with our flock of geese, she weeps, and talks with the head of a horse
that hangs upon the wall, and says--
      "'Falada, Falada, there thou art hanging!'"
and the head answers--
      "'Bride, bride, there thou art ganging!
      Sadly, sadly her heart would rue it.'"
And Curdken went on telling the king what had happened upon the meadow
where the geese fed; and how his hat was blown away, and he was forced
to run after it, and leave his flock. But the old king told him to
go out again as usual the next day, and when morning came, the king
placed himself behind the gate, and heard how she spoke to Falada, and
how Falada answered; and then he went into the field and hid himself
in a bush by the meadow's side, and soon saw with his own eyes how
they drove the flock of geese, and how, after a little time, she let
down her hair that glittered in the sun; and then he heard her say--
      Till the golden locks,
[Illustration: "THEN THERE CAME A WIND SO STRONG THAT IT BLEW OFF
CURDKEN'S HAT."]
And soon came a gale of wind, and carried away Curdken's hat, while
the girl went on combing and curling her hair.
All this the old king saw: so he went home without being seen; and
when the little goose girl came back in the evening, he called her
aside, and asked her why she did so: but she burst into tears, and
said, "That I must not tell you or any man, or I shall lose my life."
But the old king begged so hard that she had no peace till she had
told him all, word for word: and it was very lucky for her that she
did so, for the king ordered royal clothes to be put upon her, and
gazed on her with wonder, she was so beautiful.
Then he called his son, and told him that he had only the false bride,
for that she was merely a waiting-maid, while the true one stood by.
And the young king rejoiced when he saw her beauty, and heard how meek
and patient she had been; and without saying anything, ordered a great
feast to be got ready for all his court.
The bridegroom sat at the top, with the false princess on one side,
and the true one on the other; but nobody knew her, for she was quite
dazzling to their eyes, and was not at all like the little goose-girl,
now that she had her brilliant dress.
When they had eaten and drunk, and were very merry, the old king told
all the story, as one that he had once heard of, and asked the true
waiting-maid what she thought ought to be done to anyone who would
behave thus.
"Nothing better," said this false bride, "than that she should be
thrown into a cask stuck round with sharp nails, and that two white
horses should be put to it, and should drag it from street to street
till she is dead."
"Thou art she!" said the old king; "and since thou hast judged
thyself, it shall be so done to thee."
And the young king was married to his true wife, and they reigned over
the kingdom in peace and happiness all their lives.
LITTLE SNOW-WHITE
It was in the middle of winter, when the broad flakes of snow were
falling around, that a certain queen sat working at the window, the
frame of which was made of fine black ebony; and as she was looking
out upon the snow, she pricked her finger, and three drops of blood
fell upon it. Then she gazed thoughtfully upon the red drops which
sprinkled the white snow, and said, "Would that my little daughter
may be as white as that snow, as red as the blood, and as black as the
ebony window-frame!" And so the little girl grew up: her skin was as
white as snow, her cheeks as rosy as blood, and her hair as black as
ebony; and she was called Snow-White.
But this queen died; and the king soon married another wife, who was
very beautiful, but so proud that she could not bear to think that any
one could surpass her. She had a magical looking-glass, to which she
used to go and gaze upon herself in it, and say,
      "Tell me, glass, tell me true!
      Of all the ladies in the land.
      Who is fairest? Tell me who?"
And the glass answered, "Thou, Queen, art fairest in the land."
But Snow-White grew more and more beautiful; and when she was seven
years old, she was as bright as the day, and fairer than the queen
herself. Then the glass one day answered the queen, when she went to
consult it as usual:
      "Thou, Queen, may'st fair and beauteous be,
      But Snow-White is lovelier far than thee!"
When she heard this she turned pale with rage and envy; and calling
to one of her servants said, "Take Snow-White away into the wide wood,
that I may never see her more." Then the servant led her away; but his
heart melted when she begged him to spare her life, and he said, "I
will not hurt thee, thou pretty child." So he left her by herself, and
though he thought it most likely that the wild beasts would tear her
to pieces, he felt as if a great weight were taken off his heart when
he had made up his mind not to kill her, but leave her to her fate.
Then poor Snow-White wandered along through the wood in great fear;
and the wild beasts roared about her, but none did her any harm. In
the evening she came to a little cottage, and went in there to rest
herself, for her weary feet would carry her no further. Everything was
spruce and neat in the cottage: on the table was spread a white cloth,
and there were seven little plates with seven little loaves and seven
little glasses with wine in them; and knives and forks laid in order,
and by the wall stood seven little beds. Then, as she was very hungry,
she picked a little piece off each loaf, and drank a very little wine
out of each glass; and after that she thought she would lie down and
rest. So she tried all the little beds; and one was too long, and
another was too short, till at last the seventh suited her; and there
she laid herself down and went to sleep. Presently in came the masters
of the cottage, who were seven little dwarfs that lived among the
mountains, and dug and searched about for gold. They lighted up their
seven lamps, and saw directly that all was not right. The first said,
"Who has been sitting on my stool?" The second, "Who has been eating
off my plate?" The third, "Who has been picking at my bread?" the
fourth, "Who has been meddling with my spoon?" The fifth, "Who has
been handling my fork?" The sixth, "Who has been cutting with my
knife?" The seventh, "Who has been drinking my wine?" Then the first
looked round and said. "Who has been lying on my bed?" And the rest
came running to him, and every one cried out that somebody had been
upon his bed. But the seventh saw Snow-White, and called upon his
brethren to come and see her; and they cried out with wonder and
astonishment, and brought their lamps to look at her, and said, "Good
heavens! What a lovely child she is!" and they were delighted to see
her, and took care not to waken her; and the seventh dwarf slept an
hour with each of the other dwarfs in turn, till the night was gone.
[Illustration: THE MAGIC MIRROR--"LITTLE SNOW-WHITE"]
In the morning Snow-White told them all her story; and they pitied
her, and said if she would keep all things in order, and cook and
wash, and knit and spin for them, she might stay where she was, and
they would take good care of her. Then they went out all day long
to their work, seeking for gold and silver in the mountains; and
Snow-White remained at home: and they warned her, and said, "The queen
will soon find out where you are, so take care and let no one in." But
the queen, now that she thought Snow-White was dead, believed that
she was certainly the handsomest lady in the land; and she went to her
glass, and the glass answered,
      "Thou, Queen, thou art fairest in all this land;
      But over the hills, in the greenwood shade.
      Where the seven dwarfs their dwelling have made.
      There Snow-White is hiding her head; and she
      Is lovelier far, O Queen, than thee."
Then the queen was very much alarmed; for she knew that the glass
always spoke the truth, and was sure that the servant had betrayed
her. And she could not bear to think that anyone lived who was more
beautiful than she was; so she disguised herself as a pedlar and went
her way over the hills to the place where the dwarfs dwelt. Then
she knocked at the door, and cried, "Fine wares to sell!" Snow-White
looked out of the window, and cried, "Good-day, good woman; what have
you to sell?" "Good wares, fine wares," said she; "laces and bobbins
of all colours." "I will let the old lady in; she seems to be a
very good sort of a body," thought Snow-White; so she ran down, and
unbolted the door. "Bless me!" said the woman, "how badly your
stays are laced. Let me lace them up with one of my nice new laces."
Snow-White did not dream of any mischief; so she stood up before
the old woman; but she set to work so nimbly, and pulled the lace so
tight, that Snow-White lost her breath, and fell down as if she were
dead. "There's an end of all thy beauty," said the spiteful queen, and
went away home.
[Illustration: "'THERE'S AN END TO ALL THY BEAUTY' SAID THE SPITEFUL
QUEEN, AND SHE WENT AWAY HOME."]
In the evening the seven dwarfs returned; and I need not say how
grieved they were to see their faithful Snow-White stretched upon the
ground motionless, as if she were quite dead. However, they lifted her
up, and when they found what was the matter, they cut the lace; and in
a little time she began to breathe, and soon came to life again. Then
they said, "The old woman was the queen herself; take care another
time, and let no one in when we are away."
When the queen got home, she went to her glass, and spoke to it, but
to her surprise it said the same words as before.
Then the blood ran cold in her heart with spite and malice to see
that Snow-White still lived; and she dressed herself up again in a
disguise, but very different from the one she wore before, and took
with her a poisoned comb, When she reached the dwarf's cottage, she
knocked at the door, and cried, "Fine wares to sell!" but Snow-White
said, "I dare not let anyone in." Then the queen begged, "Only look at
my beautiful combs;" and gave her the poisoned one. And it looked so
pretty that she took it up and put it into her hair to try it; but the
moment it touched her head the poison was so powerful that she fell
down senseless.
"There you may lie," said the queen, and went her way. But by good
luck the dwarfs returned very early that evening; and when they saw
Snow-White lying on the ground, they thought what had happened,
and soon found the poisoned comb. And when they took it away, she
recovered, and told them all that had passed; and they warned her once
more not to open the door to anyone.
Meantime the queen went home to her glass, and trembled with rage
when she received exactly the same answer as before; and she said
"Snow-White shall die, if it costs me my life." So she went secretly
into a chamber, and prepared a poisoned apple; the outside looked very
rosy and tempting, but whosoever tasted it was sure to die. Then she
dressed herself up as a peasant's wife, and travelled over the hills
to the dwarfs' cottage, and knocked at the door; but Snow-White put
her head out of the window, and said, "I dare not let anyone in, for
the dwarfs have told me not to." "Do as you please," said the old
woman, "but at any rate take this pretty apple; I will make you a
present of it." "No," said Snow-White, "I dare not take it." "You
silly girl!" answered the other, "what are you afraid of? Do you think
it is poisoned? Come! do you eat one part, and I will eat the other."
Now the apple was so prepared that one side was good, though the other
side was poisoned. Then Snow-White was very much tempted to taste, for
the apple looked exceedingly nice; and when she saw the old woman eat,
she could refrain no longer. But she had scarcely put the piece into
her mouth, when she fell down dead upon the ground. "This time nothing
will save thee," said the queen; and she went home to her glass, and
at last it said,
      "Thou, Queen, art the fairest of all the fair."
And then her envious heart was glad, and as happy as such a heart
could be.
When evening came, and the dwarfs returned home, they found Snow-White
lying on the ground; no breath passed her lips, and they were afraid
that she was quite dead. They lifted her up, and combed her hair,
and washed her face with wine and water; but all was in vain, for the
little girl seemed quite dead. So they laid her down upon a bier, and
all seven watched and bewailed her three whole days; and then they
proposed to bury her; but her cheeks were still rosy, and her face
looked just as it did while she was alive; so they said, "We will
never bury her in the cold ground." And they made a coffin of glass
so that they might still look at her, and wrote her name upon it in
golden letters, and that she was a king's daughter. And the coffin
was placed upon the hill, and one of the dwarfs always sat by it and
watched. And the birds of the air came too, and bemoaned Snow-White.
First of all came an owl, and then a raven, but at last came a dove.
And thus Snow-White lay for a long, long time, and still only looked
as though she were asleep; for she was even now as white as snow,
and as red as blood, and as black as ebony. At last a prince came and
called at the dwarfs' house; and he saw Snow-White, and read what
was written in gold letters. Then he offered the dwarfs money, and
earnestly prayed them to let him take her away; but they said, "We
will not part with her for all the gold in the world." At last,
however, they had pity on him, and gave him the coffin; but the moment
he lifted it up to carry it home with him, the piece of apple fell
from between her lips, and Snow-White awoke, and said, "Where am I?"
And the prince answered, "Thou art safe with me." Then he told her all
that had happened, and said, "I love you better than all the world;
come with me to my father's palace, and you shall be my wife." And
Snow-White consented, and went home with the prince; and everything
was prepared with great pomp and splendour for their wedding.
To the feast was invited, among the rest, Snow-White's old enemy,
the queen; and as she was dressing herself in fine, rich clothes, she
looked, in the glass, and the glass answered,
      "Thou, lady, art the loveliest here, I ween;
      But lovelier far is the new-made queen."
When she heard this, she started with rage; but her envy and curiosity
were so great, that she could not help setting out to see the bride.
And when she arrived, and saw that it was none other than Snow-White,
who she thought had been dead a long while, she choked with passion,
and fell ill and died; but Snow-White and the prince lived and reigned
happily over that land many, many years.
CINDERELLA
The wife of a rich man fell sick: and when she felt that her end drew
nigh, she called her only daughter to her bedside, and said, "Always
be a good girl, and I will look down from heaven and watch over you."
Soon afterwards she shut her eyes and died, and was buried in the
garden; and the little girl went every day to her grave and wept,
and was always good and kind to all about her. And the snow spread a
beautiful white covering over the grave: but by the time the sun had
melted it away again, her father had married another wife. This new
wife had two daughters of her own, that she brought home with her:
they were fair in face but foul at heart, and it was now a sorry time
for the poor little girl. "What does the good-for-nothing thing want
in the parlour?" said they; "they who would eat bread should first
earn it; away with the kitchen maid!" Then they took away her fine
clothes, and gave her an old frock to put on, and laughed at her and
turned her into the kitchen.
Then she was forced to do hard work; to rise early, before daylight,
to bring the water, to make the fire, to cook and to wash. Besides
that, the sisters plagued her in all sorts of ways and laughed at her.
In the evening, when she was tired, she had no bed to lie down on, but
was made to sleep by the hearth among the ashes; and then, as she was
of course always dusty and dirty, they called her Cinderella.
It happened once that the father was going to the fair, and asked his
wife's daughters what he should bring them. "Fine clothes," said the
first: "Pearls and diamonds," said the second. "Now, child," said he
to his own daughter, "what will you have?" "The first sprig, dear
father, that rubs against your hat on your way home," said she. Then
he bought for the two first the fine clothes and pearls and diamonds
they had asked for: and on his way home as he rode through a green
copse, a sprig of hazel brushed against him, and almost pushed off his
hat; so he broke it off and brought it away; and when he got home he
gave it to his daughter. Then she took it and went to her mother's
grave and planted it there, and cried so much that it was watered with
her tears; and there it grew and became a fine tree. Three times every
day she went to it and wept; and soon a little bird came and built
its nest upon the tree, and talked with her and watched over her, and
brought her whatever she wished for.
Now it happened that the king of the land held a feast which was to
last three days, and out of those who came to it his son was to choose
a bride for himself; and Cinderella's two sisters were asked to come.
So they called her up and said, "Now, comb our hair, brush our shoes,
and tie our sashes for us, for we are going to dance at the king's
feast." Then she did as she was told, but when all was done she could
not help crying, for she thought to herself, she would have liked to
go to the dance too; and at last she begged her mother very hard to
let her go. "You! Cinderella?" said she; "you who have nothing to
wear, no clothes at all, and who cannot even dance--you want to go to
the ball?" And when she kept on begging--to get rid of her, she said
at last, "I will throw this basinful of peas into the ash heap, and
if you have picked them all out in two hours' time you shall go to
the feast too." Then she threw the peas into the ashes; but the little
maiden ran out at the back door into the garden, and cried out--
      "Hither, hither, through the sky.
      Turtle-doves and linnets, fly!
      Blackbird, thrush, and chaffinch gay,
      Hither, hither, haste away!
      One and all, come help me quick,
      Haste ye, haste ye--pick, pick, pick!"
Then first came two white doves flying in at the kitchen window; and
next came two turtle-doves; and after them all the little birds under
heaven came chirping and fluttering in, and flew down into the ashes;
and the little doves stooped their heads down and set to work, pick,
pick, pick; and then the others began to pick, pick, pick; and picked
out all the good grain and put it in a dish, and left the ashes. At
the end of one hour the work was done, and all flew out again at the
windows. Then Cinderella brought the dish to her mother, overjoyed at
the thought that now she should go to the feast. But she said, "No,
no! Girl, you have no clothes and cannot dance, you shall not go." And
when Cinderella begged very hard to go, she said, "If you can in one
hour's time pick two of these dishes of peas out of the ashes, you
shall go too." And thus she thought she should at last get rid of her.
So she shook two dishes of peas into the ashes; but the little maiden
went out into the garden at the back of the house, and cried as
before--
Then first came two white doves in at the kitchen window; and next
came the turtle-doves; and after them all the little birds under
heaven came chirping and hopping about, and flew down about the ashes;
and the little doves put their heads down and set to work, pick, pick,
pick; and then the others began to pick, pick, pick; and they put
all the good grain into the dishes, and left all the ashes, Before
half-an-hour's time all was done, and out they flew again. And then
Cinderella took the dishes to her mother, rejoicing to think that she
should now go to the ball. But her mother said, "It is all of no use,
you cannot go, you have no clothes, and cannot dance, and you would
only put us to shame:" and off she went with her two daughters to the
feast.
Now when all were gone, and nobody left at home, Cinderella went
sorrowfully and sat down under the hazel-tree, and cried out--
      "Shake, shake, hazel tree,
      Gold and silver over me!"
Then her friend the bird flew out of the tree and brought a gold and
silver dress for her, and slippers of spangled silk; and she put them
on, and followed her sisters to the feast. But they did not know her,
and thought it must be some strange princess, she looked so fine
and beautiful in her rich clothes; and they never once thought of
Cinderella, but took for granted that she was safe at home in the
dirt.
[Illustration: Painted by Jennie Harbour
CINDERELLA]
The king's son soon came up to her, and took her by the hand and
danced with her and no one else; and he never left her hand; but when
any one else came to ask her to dance, he said, "This lady is dancing
with me." Thus they danced till a late hour of the night, and then she
wanted to go home: and the king's son said, "I shall go and take care
of you to your home;" for he wanted to see where the beautiful maid
lived. But she slipped away from him unawares, and ran off towards
home, and the prince followed her; but she jumped up into the
pigeon-house and shut the door. Then he waited till her father came
home, and told him that the unknown maiden who had been at the feast
had hidden herself in the pigeon-house. But when they had broken open
the door they found no one within; and as they came back into the
house, Cinderella lay as she always did, in her dirty frock by the
ashes, and her dim little lamp burnt in the chimney; for she had
run as quickly as she could through the pigeon-house and on to the
hazel-tree, and had there taken off her beautiful clothes, and laid
them beneath the tree, that the bird might carry them away, and had
seated herself amid the ashes again in her little old frock.
The next day, when the feast was again held, and her father, mother,
and sisters were gone, Cinderella went to the hazel tree, and said--
And the bird came and brought a still finer dress than the one she had
worn the day before. And when she came in it to the ball, every one
wondered at her beauty; but the king's son, who was waiting for her,
took her by the hand, and danced with her; and when any one asked
her to dance, he said as before, "This lady is dancing with me." When
night came she wanted to go home; and the king's son followed her as
before, that he might see into what house she went; but she sprang
away from him, all at once, into the garden behind her father's house.
In this garden stood a fine large pear tree full of ripe fruit; and
Cinderella, not knowing where to hide herself, jumped up into it
without being seen. Then the king's son could not find out where she
was gone, but waited till her father came home, and said to him, "The
unknown lady who danced with me has slipped away, and I think she must
have sprung into the pear tree." The father thought to himself, "Can
it be Cinderella?" So he ordered an axe to be brought; and they cut
down the tree, but found no one upon it. And when they came back into
the kitchen, there lay Cinderella in the ashes as usual; for she had
slipped down on the other side of the tree, and carried her beautiful
clothes back to the bird at the hazel tree, and then put on her little
old frock.
The third day, when her father and mother and sisters were gone she
went again into the garden, and said---
Then her kind friend the bird brought a dress still finer than the
former ones, and slippers which were all of gold; so that when she
came to the feast no one knew what to say for wonder at her beauty;
and the king's son danced with her alone; and when any one else asked
her to dance he said, "This lady is my partner." Now when night came
she wanted to go home; and the king's son would go with her, and said
to himself, "I will not lose her this time;" but, however, she managed
to slip away from him, though in such a hurry that she dropped her
left golden slipper upon the stairs.
[Illustration: "SHE SPRANG AWAY FROM HIM, ALL AT ONCE, INTO THE GARDEN
BEHIND HER FATHER'S HOUSE."]
So the prince took the shoe, and went the next day to the king his
father, and said, "I will take for my wife the lady that this golden
shoe fits." Then both the sisters were overjoyed to hear this; for
they had beautiful feet, and had no doubt that they could wear the
golden slipper. The eldest went first into the room where the slipper
was, and wanted to try it on, and the mother stood by. But her great
toe could not go into it, and the shoe was altogether much too small
for her. Then the mother gave her a knife, and said, "Never mind, cut
it off; when you are queen you will not care about toes, you will
not want to go on foot." So the silly girl cut her great toe off, and
squeezed the shoe on, and went to the king's son. Then he took her for
his bride, and set her beside him on his horse and rode away with
her. But on their way home they had to pass by the hazel tree that
Cinderella had planted and there sat a little dove on the branch
singing---
      "Back again! back again! look to the shoe!
      The shoe is too small, and not made for you!
      Prince! prince! look again for thy bride,
      For she's not the true one that sits by thy side."
Then the prince got down and looked at her foot, and saw by the blood
that streamed from it what a trick she had played him. So he turned
his horse round and brought the false bride back to her home, and
said, "This is not the right bride; let the other sister try and put
on the slipper." Then she went into the room and got her foot into the
shoe, all but the heel, which was too large. But her mother squeezed
it in till the blood came, and took her to the king's son; and he set
her as his bride beside him on his horse, and rode away with her. But
when they came to the hazel tree the little dove sat there still, and
sang--
Then he looked down and saw that the blood streamed so from the shoe
that her white stockings were quite red. So he turned his horse and
brought her back again also. "This is not the true bride," said he to
the father; "have you no other daughters?" "No," said he; "there is
only a little dirty Cinderella here, the child of my first wife; I am
sure she cannot be the bride." However, the prince told him to send
her. But the mother said, "No, no, she is much too dirty, she will not
dare to show herself;" still the prince would have her come. And she
first washed her face and hands, and then went in and curtsied to him,
and he handed to her the golden slipper.
Then she took her clumsy shoe off her left foot and put on the golden
slipper; and it fitted her as if it had been made for her. And when
the Prince drew near and looked at her face he knew her, and said,
"This is the right bride."
But the mother and both the sisters were frightened and turned pale
with anger as he took Cinderella on his horse, and rode away with her.
And when they came to the hazel tree, the white dove sang--
      "Home! home! look at the shoe!
      Princess! the shoe was made for you!
      Prince! prince! take home thy bride.
      For she is the true one that sits by thy side!"
And when the dove had done its song, it came flying and perched upon
her shoulder, and so went home with her.
PRINCESS GOLDENHAIR
There was once a King's daughter who was the most beautiful thing in
the world, and as her hair was fair and reached to her feet she was
called the Princess Goldenhair.
A handsome young King in the neighbourhood, although he had never seen
this Princess, fell so deeply in love with her from what he had heard,
that he could neither eat nor sleep.
So an ambassador was sent with a magnificent chariot, more than a
hundred horses, and fifty pages, to bring the Princess to the King,
and great preparations were made for her reception.
[Illustration: "AN AMBASSADOR WAS SENT WITH MORE THAN A HUNDRED
HORSES, AND FIFTY PAGES TO BRING THE PRINCESS TO THE KING."]
But whether the Princess Goldenhair was in an ill humour when the
ambassador arrived at her Court, or whatever was the reason, certain
it is that she sent a message to the young King thanking him but
saying that she did not wish to marry.
When the King heard of her refusal he wept like a child.
Now at his Court there was a young man called Avenant. He was as
beautiful as the sun, and a more finely made fellow than any in the
kingdom; everybody loved him except a few envious people, who were
angry because the King favoured and confided in him, and in the
presence of these, one day, Avenant incautiously remarked,
"If the King had sent me to fetch the Princess Goldenhair, I am
certain she would have come," and these words were repeated to the
King in such a manner that they made him very angry, and he ordered
Avenant to be shut up in a high tower, to die of hunger.
In this sad plight, Avenant exclaimed one day, "How have I offended
his Majesty? He has no more faithful subject than I."
The King who happened to be passing by the tower, heard this; he
called for Avenant to be brought forth who, throwing himself on his
knees, begged to know in what way he had offended his royal master.
"You mocked me," said the King, "you said that you would have
succeeded with the Princess Goldenhair where I have failed."
"It is true, sir," replied Avenant, "I did say so, for I would have
represented your noble qualities in such a way, that she could not
help being persuaded."
The King was convinced of the young man's sincerity, and with a letter
of introduction, Avenant set out for the Court of the goldenhaired
beauty, riding alone, according to his wish, and thinking as he went
how he best could woo the Princess for his beloved master.
One day, alighting from his horse to write down some suitable words
that had come into his mind, he saw a golden carp who, leaping from
the water to catch flies, had thrown herself upon the river bank, and
was now nearly dead.
Avenant pitied the poor thing, and put her carefully back into
the water. Recovering directly, the carp dived to the bottom, but
returning to the edge of the river, said,
"Avenant, I thank you; you have saved my life, I will repay you;" then
she swam off leaving the young man in great astonishment.
Another day as Avenant journeyed he noticed a raven who was pursued by
an eagle. "What right has that eagle to persecute the raven? thought
Avenant, and he drew his bow and shot the fierce bird. The raven
perched on a bough and cried.
"Avenant you have saved my life, I will not be ungrateful, I will
repay you."
Not long after this, Avenant found an owl caught in a snare, he cut
the strings, and freed the trembling captive. "Avenant," said the owl,
"you have saved my life, I will repay you."
These three adventures were the most important that befell Avenant,
and he went on his way, shortly before he arrived at his destination
purchasing a beautiful little dog named Cabriole.
When Avenant reached the Palace of the Princess Goldenhair, and saw
the Princess seated upon her throne, she looked so lovely that at
first all his fine speeches forsook him, and he could not utter a
word; however, taking courage, he addressed her in exquisitely chosen
language, begging her to become the King's bride.
To this the Princess replied most graciously, saying that his petition
moved her more than any other could do, "but know," she added, "as I
was walking by the river a month ago, as I took off my glove, a ring,
that I greatly value, fell into the water, and I have vowed that I
will not heed any proposal of marriage, except from the ambassador who
brings me back my ring."
Sad at heart Avenant left the Palace, but his little dog, Cabriole,
said, "My dear master, do not despair, you are too good to be unhappy.
Early to-morrow morning let us go to the river-side." Avenant patted
him, but did not answer, and, still sad, fell asleep.
As soon as it was day, Cabriole awoke him saying, "Dress yourself, my
master, and come out."
They wandered down to the river, and there Avenant heard a voice
calling him, and what should he see but the golden carp, with the
Princess's ring in her mouth. "Take it, dear Avenant," said she, "I
promised to repay you for saving my life, and now I can fulfil my
promise."
Thanking her a thousand times, Avenant, going at once to the Palace,
said, "Princess, your command is fulfilled; may it please you to
receive the King, my master, as your husband."
The Princess thought she must be dreaming when she saw the ring, but
she set Avenant another task.
"Not far from here there is a prince named Galifron," said she; "he
wishes to marry me, and threatens to ravish my kingdom if I refuse;
but how can I accept him? He is a giant, taller than my highest tower,
he eats a man as a monkey would eat a chestnut, and when he speaks,
his voice is so loud that it deafens those who hear him. He will not
take my refusal, but kills my subjects. You must fight and bring me
his head."
"Well, madam," replied Avenant, "I will fight Galifron; I expect I
shall be killed, but I shall die a brave man." And, taking Cabriole,
Avenant set out for Galifron's country, asking news of the giant as he
went along, and the more he heard the more he feared him, but Cabriole
reassured him. "My dear master," said the little dog, "while you are
fighting him I will bite his legs, then he will stoop to chase me, and
you will kill him." Avenant admired the bravery of the little dog, but
he knew his help would not be sufficient.
Presently they perceived how the roads were covered with the bones of
the men that Galifron had eaten, and soon they saw the giant coming
towards them through a wood. His head was higher than the highest
trees, and he sang in a terrific voice:
      "Where are the children small, so small,
      With my teeth I will crush them all,
      On so many would I feed, feed, feed.
      The whole world can't supply my need."
Using the same tune, Avenant began to sing:
      "Look down, here is Avenant beneath, beneath
      He will draw from your head, the teeth, the teeth
      Although he is not very big, 'tis true,
      He is able to fight with such as you."
The giant put himself into a terrible passion, and would have killed
Avenant with one blow, only a raven from above flew at his head, and
pecked him straight in the eyes, so violently that he was blinded. He
began striking out on all sides, but Avenant avoided his blows, and
with his sword pierced him so many times that at last he fell to the
ground. Then Avenant cut off his head, and the raven, who had perched
on a tree, said,
"I have not forgotten how you rescued me from the eagle; I promised to
repay you, I think I have done so to-day."
"I owe everything to you, Mr. Raven," responded Avenant, as, holding
Galifron's head, he rode off.
When he entered the town, crowds followed him crying, "Here is the
brave Avenant who has slain the monster."
Avenant advanced to the Princess, and said, "Madam, your enemy is
dead. I hope you will no more refuse the King, my master."
"Although it is so," answered the Princess, "I shall refuse him unless
you will bring me some water from the Grotto of Darkness. At the
entrance there are two dragons, with fire in their eyes and mouths;
inside the grotto there is a deep pit into which you must descend, it
is full of toads, scorpions, and serpents. At the bottom of this pit
there is a little cave where flows the fountain of beauty and health.
Positively I must possess the water; all who wash in it, if they are
beautiful, continue so always, if they are ugly they become beautiful;
if they are young they remain young, if they are old they regain their
youth. You cannot wonder, Avenant, that I will not leave my kingdom
without taking it with me."
So once more Avenant and Cabriole set out; they journeyed on until
they came to a rock, black as ink, from which smoke was issuing, and
a moment later there appeared one of the dragons belching forth fire
from his eyes and mouth. He was a frightful looking creature with a
green and yellow body, and his tail was so long that it went into a
hundred curves. Avenant saw all this, but resolved to die, he drew his
sword, and, carrying the flask the Princess had given to him to hold
the water, he said to Cabriole:
"My days are ended, I can never obtain that water the dragons are
guarding; when I am dead, fill this flask with my blood and carry it
to the Princess, that she may know what it has cost me, then go to the
King, my master, and tell him of my misfortune."
As he was speaking, a voice called, "Avenant, Avenant," and looking
around he saw an owl. "You saved my life from the fowlers," said the
owl. "I promised to repay you, the time has now come. Give me your
flask. I will bring you the water of beauty."
And carrying the flask, the owl entered the grotto, unhindered,
returning in less than a quarter of an hour with it full to the brim.
Avenant thanked the owl heartily, and joyously started for the town,
where he presented the flask to the Princess, who immediately gave
orders to prepare for her departure.
But as she considered Avenant altogether charming, before she set out,
she several times said to him: "If you wish, we need not go, for I
will make you king of my country." But Avenant made reply:
"I would not displease my master for all the kingdoms of earth,
although your beauty I consider greater than that of the sun."
Thus they arrived at the King's capital, and the wedding took place
amidst great rejoicings; but Princess Goldenhair, who loved Avenant
from the depths of her heart, was not happy unless she could see him,
and was for ever singing his praises. "I should not have come, had it
not been for Avenant," she told the King, "you ought to be very much
obliged to him." Then the envious courtiers counselled the King, and
Avenant was cast once more into the tower, chained hand and foot. When
Princess Goldenhair heard of this imprisonment, she fell on her knees
before the King, and begged for Avenant's release; but he would not
heed her, so that she became saddened and would speak no more.
Then the King thought: "Maybe I am not handsome enough to please her!"
so he determined to wash his face in the water of beauty.
Now it had happened that a chamber-maid had broken the flask
containing this wonderful water, so that it was all spilled; then,
without saying anything to anyone, she had replaced it by a similar
flask taken from the King's apartment, but the liquid in this flask
was really that which was used when the princes or great lords were
condemned to death, for, instead of being beheaded, their faces were
washed with this water and they fell asleep and did not wake again.
And so the King using this water one evening, thinking it to be the
beauty water, and hoping and expecting to be made more handsome, went
to sleep and awoke no more. Upon hearing what had occurred, Cabriole
at once went and told Avenant, who asked him to go to the Princess
Goldenhair and beseech her to remember the poor prisoner. When the
Princess received this message, she went straight to the tower, and,
with her own hands, struck off the chains that bound Avenant, and
placing a crown of gold upon his head, and a royal mantle upon his
shoulders, said: "Come, dear Avenant, I will make you King, and take
you for my husband." Then there was a grand wedding, and Princess
Goldenhair and Avenant, with Cabriole, lived long, all of them happy
and contented.
LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD
Many years ago there lived a dear little girl, who was beloved by
everyone who knew her; but her grandmother was so very fond of her
that she never felt that she could think and do enough for her.
On her grand-daughter's birthday she presented her with a red silk
hood; and as it suited her very well, she would never wear anything
else; and so she was called Little Red Riding Hood. One day her mother
said to her, "Come, Red Riding Hood, here is a nice piece of meat,
and a bottle of wine: take these to your grandmother; she is weak and
ailing, and they will do her good. Be there before she gets up; go
quietly and carefully; and do not run, or you may fall and break the
bottle, and then your grandmother will have nothing. When you go into
her room, do not forget to say 'Good-morning'; and do not pry into all
the corners." "I will do just as you say," answered Red Riding Hood,
bidding good-bye to her mother.
LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD]
The grandmother lived far away in the wood, a long walk from the
village, and as Little Red Riding Hood came among the trees she met a
wolf; but she did not know what a wicked animal it was, and so she
was not at all frightened. "Good-morning, Little Red Riding Hood," he
"Thank you, Mr. Wolf," she said.
"Where are you going so early, Little Red Riding Hood?"
"To my grandmother's," she answered.
"And what are you carrying under your apron?"
"Some wine and meat," she replied. "We baked the meat yesterday, so
that grandmother, who is very weak, might have a nice strengthening
meal."
"And where does your grandmother live?" asked the Wolf.
"Oh, quite twenty minutes' walk further in the forest. The cottage
stands under three great oak trees; and close by are some nut bushes,
by which you will at once know it."
The wolf was thinking to himself, "She is a nice tender thing, and
will taste better than the old woman; I must act cleverly, that I may
make a meal of both."
[Illustration: "WHERE ARE YOU GOING SO EARLY, LITTLE RED RIDING
HOOD."]
Presently he came up again to Little Red Riding Hood and said. "Just
look at the beautiful flowers which grow near you; why do you not look
about you? I believe you don't hear how sweetly the birds are singing.
You walk as if you were going to school; see how cheerful everything
is around you in the forest."
And Little Red Riding Hood opened her eyes; and when she saw how the
sunbeams glanced and danced through the trees, and what bright flowers
were blooming in her path, she thought, "If I take my grandmother a
fresh nosegay she will be much pleased; and it is so very early that
I can, even then, get there in good time:" and running into the forest
she looked about for flowers. But when she had once begun she did
not know how to leave off, and kept going deeper and deeper among the
trees looking for some still more beautiful flower. The Wolf, however,
ran straight to the house of the old grandmother, and knocked at the
"Who's that?" asked the old lady.
"Only little Red Riding Hood, bringing you some meat and wine; please
open the door," answered the Wolf.
"Lift up the latch," cried the grandmother; "I am much too ill to get
up myself."
So the Wolf lifted the latch, and the door flew open; and without a
word he jumped on to the bed and gobbled up the poor old lady. Then he
put on her clothes, and tied her night-cap over his head; got into the
bed, and drew the blankets over him.
All this time Red Riding Hood was gathering flowers; and when she had
picked as many as she could carry, she thought of her grandmother, and
hurried to the cottage. She wondered very much to find the door
open; and when she got into the room, she began to feel very ill, and
exclaimed, "How sad I feel! I wish I had not come to-day." Then she
said, "Good morning," but received no reply; so she went up to the
bed, and drew back the curtains, and there lay her grandmother as
she imagined, with the cap drawn half over her eyes and looking very
fierce.
"Oh, grandmother, what great ears you have!"
"All the better to hear you with," was the reply.
"And what great eyes you have!"
"All the better to see you with."
"And what great hands you have!"
"All the better to touch you with."
"But, grandmother, what very great teeth you have!"
"All the better to eat you with;" and hardly were the words spoken
when the Wolf made a jump out of bed and swallowed down poor Little
Red Riding Hood also.
As soon as he had thus satisfied his hunger, he laid himself down
again on the bed, and went to sleep and snored very loudly. A huntsman
passing by overheard him, and said, "How loudly that old woman snores!
I must see if anything is the matter."
So he went into the cottage; and when he came to the bed, he saw the
Wolf sleeping in it.
"What! are you here, you old rascal? I have been looking for you,"
exclaimed he; and taking up his gun, he shot the old Wolf through the
But it is also said that the story ends in a different manner; for
that one day, when Red Riding Hood was taking some presents to her
grandmother, a Wolf met her, and wanted to mislead her; but she went
straight on, and told her grandmother that she had met a Wolf, who
said good-day; but he looked so hungrily out of his great eyes, as if
he would have eaten her up had she not been on the high road.
So her grandmother said, "We will shut the door, and then he cannot
get in."
Soon after, up came the Wolf, who tapped, and exclaimed, "I am Little
Red Riding Hood, grandmother; I have some roast meat for you." But
they kept quite quiet, and did not open the door; so the Wolf, after
looking several times round the house, at last jumped on to the roof,
thinking to wait till Red Riding Hood went home in the evening, and
then to creep after her and eat her in the darkness.
The old woman, however, saw what the villain intended. There stood
before the door a large stone trough, and she said to Little Red
Riding Hood, "Take this bucket, dear: yesterday I boiled some meat in
this water, now pour it into the stone trough." Then the Wolf sniffed
the smell of the meat, and his mouth watered, and he wished very much
to taste.
At last he stretched his neck too far over, so that he lost his
balance, and fell down from the roof, right into the great trough
below, and there he was drowned.
[Illustration: "WITHOUT A WORD HE JUMPED ON TO THE BED AND GOBBLED UP
THE POOR OLD LADY."]
THE WHITE FAWN
There was once upon a time a King and Queen who were perfectly happy,
with one exception, and that was that they had no child.
One day when the Queen was staying in a watering-place, some distance
from home, she was sitting by a fountain alone, sadly thinking of the
daughter she longed to have, when she perceived a crab coming in her
direction, who, to the Queen's surprise, addressed her thus:
"Great Queen, if you will condescend to be conducted by a humble
crab, I will lead you to a Fairies' palace and your wish shall be
fulfilled."
"I would certainly come with you," replied the Queen, "but I am afraid
that I cannot walk backwards."
The crab smiled, and transforming herself into a beautiful little old
woman, said:
"Now, madam, it is not necessary to go backwards. Come with me, and
I beg of you to look upon me as your friend." She then escorted the
Queen to the most magnificent palace that could possibly be imagined,
it was built entirely of diamonds.
In this superb place dwelt six Fairies who received the Queen with
the greatest respect, and each one presented her with a flower made of
precious stones--a rose, tulip, an anemone, a columbine, a violet, and
a carnation.
"Madam," they said, "we have pleasure in telling you that soon you
will have a daughter whom you will name Desirée. Directly she arrives,
do not fail to call upon us, for we will bestow all sorts of good
gifts upon her. You have only to hold this bouquet, and mention each
flower, thinking of us, and be assured that we shall at once appear in
your chamber."
The Queen, transported with joy, and overcome with gratitude, threw
herself upon their necks, and warmly embraced them; she then spent
several hours admiring the wonders of the palace and its gardens, and
it was not until evening that she returned to her attendants, who were
in a serious state of anxiety at the prolonged absence of Her Majesty.
Not very long afterwards, when the Queen was once more at home in her
Royal Palace, a baby Princess was born, whom she named Desirée. Then
taking the bouquet into her hand, the Queen, one by one, pronounced
the names of the flowers, when there immediately appeared, flying
through the air in elegant chariots drawn by different kinds of birds,
the six Fairies who entered the apartment, bearing beautiful presents
for the little baby. Marvellously fine linen, but so strong that it
could be worn a hundred years without going into holes, lace of the
finest, with the history of the world worked into its pattern, toys
of all descriptions that a child would love to play with, and a cradle
ornamented with rubies and diamonds, and supported by four Cupids
ready to rock it should the baby cry. But, best of all, the Fairies
endowed the little Princess with beauty, and virtue, and health, and
every good thing that could be desired.
The Queen was thanking the Fairies a thousand times for all their
favours, when the door opened, and a crab appeared.
"Ungrateful Queen," said the crab, "you have not deigned to remember
me, the Fairy of the Fountain; and to punish your ingratitude, if the
Princess sees daylight before she is fifteen years old, she will have
cause to repent it, and it may cost her her life. It was well I took
the form of a crab, for your friendship instead of advancing has gone
backwards." Then in spite of all the Queen and the Fairies could say,
the crab went backwards out of the door, leaving them in the saddest
consternation, and it was long before they could decide what was best
to be done.
Then, with three waves of a wand, the Fairies caused a high tower to
spring up; it had neither door nor window, an underground passage was
made, through which everything necessary could be carried, and in
this tower the little Princess was shut up and there she lived by
candlelight, where never a glimpse of the sun could come.
When the Princess Desirée was fourteen years old, the Queen had her
portrait painted, and copies of it were carried to all the Courts
in the world. All the Princes admired it greatly, but there was one
Prince, named Guerrier, who loved it above everything; he used to
stand before the picture and avow his passion, just as if it heard
what he said, and at last he told the King, his father.
"You have resolved that I shall marry the Princess Noire, but this I
can never do, so great is my love for the Princess Desirée."
"But where have you seen her?" enquired the King.
The Prince hastened to fetch her portrait, and the King was so greatly
struck by Desirée's beauty that he agreed to follow his son's wishes
and break off his engagement with the Princess Noire, that he might
wed the Princess Desirée. So the King despatched as ambassador a rich
young lord named Bécafigue.
Bécafigue was devoted to Prince Guerrier, and he fitted out a most
splendid retinue to visit the Princess Desirée's Court. Besides
numerous magnificent presents, Bécafigue took with him the Prince's
portrait, which had been painted by such a clever artist that it would
speak; it could not exactly answer questions, but could make certain
remarks. It was truly a speaking likeness of the young Prince.
Desirée's father and mother were delighted when they heard that the
Prince Guerrier was seeking their daughter's hand in marriage, for
they knew him to be a brave and noble young man. But as it still
wanted three months to the Princess's fifteenth year, warned by
the Fairy Tulip, who had taken Desirée under her special care, they
refused to let him see their daughter or to let her yet marry the
Prince Guerrier, but they showed her the Prince's portrait, with
which she was greatly pleased, and particularly when it said, "Lovely
Desirée, you cannot imagine how ardently I am waiting for you; come
soon into our Court to make it beautiful by your presence."
When Prince Guerrier saw the ambassador return without Desirée, he
was so terribly disappointed that he could neither eat nor sleep, and
before long fell dangerously ill.
Meanwhile Desirée had no less pleasure in looking at the Prince's
portrait than he had had admiring hers, and this was soon discovered
by those around her, and among others Giroflée and Longue Epine, her
maids of honour. Giroflée loved her passionately and faithfully, but
Longue Epine was full of envy of the Princess who was so good and
beautiful, and, besides Longue Epine, Desirée had another enemy,
and that was the Princess Noire, to whom Prince Guerrier had been
betrothed. This Princess Noire now went to the Fairy of the Fountain,
who was her best friend, and begged her to take revenge upon Princess
Desirée, and this the Fairy promised to do. Meanwhile once more
Bécafigue came to the capital where Desirée's father lived, and
throwing himself at the King's feet, besought him in most touching
words to let his daughter go with him at once to the Prince, who would
surely die if he could not behold her.
When Princess Desirée heard of the Prince's illness, she suggested
that she should set out without delay, but in a dark carriage,
that only at night should be opened to give her food. This plan was
approved of; the ambassador was told, and he departed full of joy. So
in a carriage like a large dark box, shut up with her Lady in Waiting
and her two Maids of Honour, Giroflée and Longue Epine, Princess
Desirée departed for Prince Guerrier's Court.
Perhaps you will remember that Longue Epine did not like Princess
Desirée, but she greatly admired Prince Guerrier, for she had seen his
portrait speaking, and she had told her mother, the Lady in Waiting,
that she should die if he married Desirée.
The King and Queen had begged the Lady in Waiting to take the greatest
of care of their dear daughter, and above all to be heedful that she
did not see the light of day until her fifteenth birthday, saying that
the ambassador had promised that until then she should be placed where
there was no other light than that of candles. But now as they drew
near their destination, while it was broad daylight the wicked woman,
urged by her envious daughter, Longue Epine, all at once took a large
knife which she had brought for the purpose, and with it cut the
covering of the carriage.
Then, for the first time, the Princess Desirée saw the light of day!!!
Hardly had she perceived it when, uttering a deep sigh, she threw
herself from the carriage, and in the form of a white fawn fleetly
fled into a forest near by.
The Fairy of the Fountain, who was the cause of this disaster seeing
that all who were accompanying the Princess were about to hasten to
the town to tell the Prince Guerrier what had happened, called up a
great thunderstorm and scattered them in every direction. Only the
Lady in Waiting, Longue Epine and Giroflée were left, Giroflée, who
ran after her mistress, making the trees and rocks echo with her
mournful calls. Then Longue Epine clothed herself in the rich bridal
robes provided for Desirée. She placed the crown upon her head, the
sceptre and orb she carried in her hands, so that all should take her
for the Princess. With her mother bearing her train she gravely walked
in the direction of the town.
[Illustration: "A GREAT THUNDERSTORM SCATTERED THEM IN EVERY
DIRECTION."]
They had not gone far when a brilliant procession came towards them,
amongst whom was the sick Prince in a litter, and to those in advance
Longue Epine announced that she was the Princess Desirée, with her
Lady in Waiting, but that a jealous Fairy had sent a thunderstorm
which had destroyed her carriage and scattered her other attendants.
When the Prince was told of this, he could not refrain from saying
to the messengers: "Now acknowledge, is she not truly a miracle of
beauty, a Princess beyond compare?"
No one replied at first, and then one of the boldest said,
"Sir, you will see; apparently the fatigue of the journey has somewhat
changed her." The Prince was surprised, but when he saw Longue Epine
words fail to express what he felt.
She was so tall that it was alarming, and the garments of the Princess
hardly came to her knees. She was frightfully thin, and her nose,
which was more hooked than a parrot's beak, shone like a danger
signal. Then her teeth were black and uneven, and, in fact, she was as
ugly as Desirée was beautiful.
At first the Prince could not speak a word, he simply gazed at her
in amazement. Then he said, turning to his father, "We have been
deceived, that portrait was painted to mislead us. It will be the
death of me."
"What do I hear, they have deceived you," fiercely exclaimed Longue
Epine.
"It is not to be wondered at," remarked the King, "that your father
kept such a treasure shut up for fifteen years."
Then he and the Prince turned towards the town, and the false Princess
and the Lady in Waiting, without any ceremony, were mounted each
behind a soldier and taken to be shut up in a castle.
THE WHITE FAWN]
Soon after his terrible disappointment, Prince Guerrier, unable to
bear any longer the life at court, secretly departed from the palace
with his faithful friend Bécafigue, leaving a letter for his father
saying he would return to him as soon as his mind was in a happier
state, and begging him meanwhile to keep the ugly Princess prisoner,
and think of some revenge upon the deceitful king, her father.
After three or four days' journeying, the wanderers found themselves
in a thick forest. Quite wearied out, the Prince threw himself
upon the ground, while Bécafigue went on further in search of fruit
wherewith to refresh his royal master.
It is a long time since we left the White Fawn, that is to say the
charming Princess.
Very desolately she wept when in a stream she saw her figure
reflected, and when night came she was in great fear, for she heard
wild beasts about her, and sometimes forgetting she was a fawn she
would try to climb a tree. But with morning dawn she felt a little
safer, and the sun appeared a marvellous sight to her from which she
could hardly turn her eyes. But now the Fairy Tulip, who had always
loved the Princess guided Giroflée's feet in her direction, and
when the White Fawn saw her faithful Maid of Honour her delight was
boundless.
It did not take Giroflée long to discover that this was her
dearly-loved mistress, and she promised the White Fawn never to
forsake her, for she found she could hear all that was said although
she could not speak. Towards night the fear of having no shelter made
the two friends so dreadfully dismayed that the Fairy Tulip suddenly
appeared before them.
"I am not going to scold you," she said, "although it is through not
following my advice that you are in this misfortune, for it goes to
my heart to see you thus. I cannot release you altogether from this
enchantment, but I have power to shorten the time, and also to say
that during the night you may regain your rightful form, but by day
again must you run through the forest as a Fawn." The fairy also told
them where they could find a little hut in which to pass the nights.
Then she disappeared. Giroflée and the Fawn walked in the direction
the Fairy had pointed out, and arrived at a neat little cottage where
an old woman showed them a room which they could occupy.
As soon as it was night Desirée came to her rightful form, but when
day appeared she was once more a Fawn and, escaping into the thicket,
commenced to run about in the ordinary way.
You have heard how Prince Guerrier rested in the forest while
Bécafigue searched for fruit; quite late in the evening Bécafigue
arrived at the cottage of the good woman who had given shelter to
Giroflée and the White Fawn. He addressed her politely and asked for
the things he required for his master. She hastened to fill a basket,
and gave it to him, saying, "I fear that if you pass a night without
shelter some harm may come to you. I can offer you a poor one, but at
any rate it is secure from the lions."
Bécafigue went back to the Prince and together they returned to the
cottage, where they were led into the room next to that occupied by
the Princess.
Next morning the Prince arose early and went out; he had not long been
in the forest when he saw a beautiful little Fawn. Hunting had ever
been his favourite pastime, and now he pursued the little creature.
All day long hither and thither he chased, but did not succeed in
capturing her, and as evening fell the Fawn slipped away and gained
the little hut where Giroflée anxiously awaited her, and on hearing
her adventure the Maid of Honour told her she must never again venture
out, but the Princess replied:
"It is no use talking thus, when I am a Fawn this room is stifling to
me and I must depart from it."
The next day the young Prince sought in vain for the White Fawn, and
finally tired out threw himself upon the grass and fell asleep.
While he lay there the little Fawn drew near and looking at him
quietly, to her astonishment she recognised his features as those of
the Prince Guerrier. Coming nearer and nearer she presently touched
him and he awoke.
His surprise was great at seeing close by the shy little Fawn, who
stayed not an instant longer but fled away, the Prince following.
"Stay, dear little Fawn," he cried, "I would not hurt you for the
world." But the wind carried off the words before they reached her
ears. Long he chased the poor creature, till at last worn out the Fawn
sank down on the ground and the Prince came up to her.
"Beautiful Fawn," said he, "do not fear me, I shall lead you with
me everywhere." Then he covered her with roses and fed her with the
choicest leaves and grasses.
But as evening drew near the Fawn longed to escape, for what would
happen should she suddenly change into a Princess there in the forest.
Presently the Prince went to fetch some water for her, and while he
was gone she ran homewards. The next day for a long time she hid from
the Prince, but at last he found her, and as she dashed off he shot an
arrow which wounded her in the leg.
Sad that he should have done so cruel a thing, the Prince took herbs
and laid them upon the wound, and at last he went to fetch Bécafigue
to help him carry her to the house. He tied her to a tree.
Alas! Who would have thought that the most beautiful Princess in the
world would be treated thus? While she was straining at the ribbons
trying to break them, Giroflée arrived, and was leading her away when
the Prince met them and claimed the Fawn as his.
"Sir," politely replied Giroflée, "the Fawn was mine before it was
yours," and she spoke to the Fawn, and the Fawn obeyed her in such
a way that the Prince could not doubt that what she said was true.
Giroflée then went on, and, to the surprise of the Prince and
Bécafigue, entered the old woman's house where they themselves lodged.
Then Bécafigue told the Prince that unless he was much mistaken the
owner of the Fawn had lived with the Princess Desirée when he went
there as ambassador.
"I mean to see her again," said Bécafigue, "there is only a partition
between her room and ours." And soon he had made a hole large enough
to peep through, and through it he saw the charming Princess dressed
in a robe of brocaded silver, with flowers embroidered in gold and
emeralds, her hair falling in heavy masses on the most beautiful neck
in the world. Giroflée was on her knees before her, bandaging up
one arm from which the blood was flowing. They both seemed greatly
concerned about the wound: "Let me die," the Princess was saying,
"death would be better than the life which I lead. To be a Fawn all
the day, to hear him speaking, and not to be able to tell him of my
sad fate."
One can guess the astonishment of Bécafigue and of the Prince.
Guerrier would almost have died of pleasure had he not thought that
it must be some enchantment, for did he not know that Desirée and her
Lady in Waiting were shut up in the castle.
He went softly and knocked at the chamber door, which Giroflée opened,
thinking it was the old woman, for she required help for the wounded
arm.
The Prince entered, threw himself at Desirée's feet, and found she was
indeed his Princess.
Great was their joy thus at last meeting, and while they were talking
to each other the night passed, and the day dawned, and daylight came,
and the morning sun shone brightly before Desirée had time to notice
that she had not again taken the shape of a Fawn, but was her own
beautiful self.
Then it was found that it was the Fairy Tulip in disguise of the old
woman who had provided that sheltering cottage in the forest.
The joy of the King upon once more seeing his son can well be
imagined, and the marriage of the Prince and Desirée, and Bécafigue
and Giroflée took place on the same day, the Fairies giving their
diamond palace as their wedding present to Princess Desirée, and Fairy
Tulip presenting four gold mines in the Indies to Giroflée.
And, in accordance with the wish of Princess Desirée, Longue Epine and
her mother, the false Lady in Waiting, were set at liberty.
HANSEL AND GRETHEL
Once upon a time there dwelt near a large wood a poor wood cutter,
with his wife, and two children by his former marriage, a little boy
called Hansel, and a girl named Grethel. He had little enough to break
or bite; and once, when there was a great famine in the land, he could
hardly procure even his daily bread; and as he lay thinking in his bed
one night, he sighed, and said to his wife, "What will become of us?
How can we feed our children, when we have no more than we can eat
ourselves?"
"Know then, my husband," answered she, "we will lead them away, quite
early in the morning, into the thickest part of the wood, and there
make them a fire, and give them each a little piece of bread, then we
will go to our work, and leave them alone, so they will not find the
way home again, and we shall be freed from them."
"No, wife," replied he, "that I can never do; how can you bring your
heart to leave my children all alone in the wood; for the wild beasts
will soon come and tear them to pieces?"
"Oh, you simpleton!" said she, "then we must all four die of hunger;
you had better plane the coffins for us." But she left him no peace
till he consented, saying, "Ah, but I shall miss the poor children."
The two children, however, had not gone to sleep, for very hunger, and
so they overheard what the stepmother said to their father. Grethel
wept bitterly, and said to Hansel, "What will become of us?"
"Be quiet, Grethel," said he; "do not cry--I will help you." And as
soon as their parents had gone to sleep, he got up, put on his coat,
and, unbarring the back door, went out. The moon shone brightly, and
the white pebbles which lay before the door seemed like silver pieces,
they glittered so brightly. Hansel stooped down, and put as many into
his pocket as it would hold; and then going back he said to Grethel,
"Be of good cheer, dear sister, and sleep in peace; God will not
forsake us." And so saying, he went to bed again.
The next morning, before the sun arose, the wife went and awoke the
two children. "Get up, you lazy things; we are going into the forest
to chop wood." Then she gave them each a piece of bread, saying,
"There is something for your dinner; do not eat it before the time,
for you will get nothing else." Grethel took the bread in her apron,
for Hansel's pocket was full of pebbles; and so they all set out upon
their way. When they had gone a little distance, Hansel stood still,
and peeped back at the house; and this he repeated several times, till
his father said, "Hansel, what are you looking at, and why do you lag
behind? Take care, and remember your legs."
"Ah, father," said Hansel, "I am looking at my white cat sitting upon
the roof of the house, and trying to say good-bye."
"You simpleton!" said the wife, "that is not a cat; it is only the sun
shining on the white chimney." But in reality Hansel was not looking
at a cat; but every time he stopped, he dropped a pebble out of his
pocket upon the path.
When they came to the middle of the forest, the father told the
children to collect wood, and he would make them a fire, so that they
should not be cold. So Hansel and Grethel gathered together quite a
little mount of twigs. Then they set fire to them; and as the flame
burnt up high, the wife said, "Now, you children, lie down near the
fire, and rest yourselves, whilst we go into the forest and chop more
wood; when we are ready we will come and call you."
Hansel and Grethel sat down by the fire, and when it was noon, each
ate the piece of bread; and because they could hear the blows of an
axe they thought their father was near; but it was not an axe, but a
branch which he had bound to an old tree, so as to be blown to and fro
by the wind. They waited so long, that at last their eyes closed from
weariness, and they fell fast asleep. When they awoke, it was quite
dark, and Grethel began to cry. "How shall we get out of the wood?"
But Hansel tried to comfort her by saying, "Wait a little while till
the moon rises, and then we will quickly find the way." The moon shone
forth, and Hansel, taking his sister's hand, followed the pebbles,
which glittered like new-coined silver pieces, and showed them the
way. All night long they walked on, and as day broke they came to
their father's house. They knocked at the door, and when the wife
opened it, and saw Hansel and Grethel, she exclaimed, "You wicked
children! Why did you sleep so long in the wood? We thought you were
never coming home again." But their father was extremely glad, for it
had grieved his heart to leave them all alone.
[Illustration: "HANSEL AND GRETHEL SAT DOWN BY THE FIRE."]
Not long afterwards there was again great scarcity in every corner of
the land; and one night the children overheard their mother saying to
their father, "Everything is once more consumed; we have only half a
loaf left, and then the song is ended: the children must be sent away.
We will take them deeper into the wood, so that they may not find the
way out again; it is the only means of escape for us."
But her husband felt heavy at heart, and thought, "It were better
to share the last crust with the children." His wife, however, would
listen to nothing that he said, and scolded and reproached him without
end.
He who says A must say B too; and he who consents the first time must
also the second.
The children, however, had heard the conversation as they lay awake,
and as soon as their parents went to sleep Hansel got up, intending to
pick up some pebbles as before; but the wife had locked the door, so
that he could not get out. Nevertheless he comforted Grethel, saying,
"Do not weep; sleep in quiet; the good God will not forsake us."
Early in the morning the stepmother came and pulled them out of bed,
and gave them each a slice of bread, which was still smaller than the
former piece. On the way Hansel broke his in his pocket, and stopping
every now and then, dropped a crumb upon the path. "Hansel, why do
you stop and look about?" said the father, "keep in the path." "I am
looking at my little dove," answered Hansel, "nodding a good-bye to
me." "Simpleton!" said the wife, "that is no dove, but only the sun
shining on the chimney." But Hansel kept still dropping crumbs as he
went along.
The mother led the children deep into the wood, where they had never
been before, and there making a gigantic fire, she said to them, "Sit
down here and rest, and when you feel tired you can sleep for a little
while. We are going into the forest to hew wood, and in the evening,
when we are ready, we will come and fetch you again."
When noon came, Grethel shared her bread with Hansel, who had strewn
his on the path. They then went to sleep; but the evening arrived and
no one came to visit the poor children, and in the dark night they
awoke, and Hansel comforted his sister by saying, "Only wait, Grethel,
till the moon comes out, then we shall see the crumbs of bread which I
have dropped, and they will show us the way home." The moon shone and
they got up, but they could not see any crumbs, for the thousands of
birds which had been flying about in the woods and fields had picked
them all up. Hansel kept saying to Grethel, "We will soon find the
way;" but they did not, and they walked the whole night long and the
next day, but still they did not come out of the wood; and they got
very hungry, for they had nothing to eat but the berries which they
found upon the bushes. Soon they were so tired that they could not
drag themselves along, then they lay down under a tree and again went
to sleep.
HANSEL AND GRETHEL]
It was now the third morning since they had left their father's house,
and they still walked on; but they only got deeper, and deeper, and
deeper into the wood, and Hansel felt that if help did not come
very soon they must die of hunger. As soon as it was noon they saw a
beautiful, snow-white bird sitting upon a bough, singing so sweetly
that they stood still and listened to it. It soon ceased, and
spreading its wings flew off; and they followed it until it arrived at
a cottage, upon the roof of which it perched; and when they went close
up to it they saw that the cottage was made of bread and cakes, and
the window-panes were of clear sugar.
"We will go in here," said Hansel, "and have a glorious feast. I will
eat a piece of the roof, and you can eat the window. Will they not be
sweet?" So Hansel reached up and broke a piece off the roof, in order
to see how it tasted; while Grethel stepped up to the window and
began to bite it. Then a sweet voice called out in the room, "Tip-tap,
tip-tap, who knocks at my door?" and the children answered, "The
wind, the wind, the child of heaven;" and they went on eating without
interruption. Hansel thought the roof tasted very nice, and so he tore
off a great piece; while Grethel broke a large round pane out of the
window, and sat down quite contentedly. Just then the door opened, and
a very old woman, walking upon crutches, came out. Hansel and Grethel
were so much frightened that they let fall what they had in their
hands; but the old woman nodding her head, said, "Ah, you dear
children, what has brought you here? Come in and stop with me, and no
harm shall come to you;" and so saying she took them both by the hand,
and led them into her cottage. A good meal of milk and pancakes, with
sugar, apples and nuts, was spread on the table, and in the back
room were two nice little beds, covered with white, where Hansel and
Grethel laid themselves down, and were happy as could be. The old
woman behaved very kindly to them, but in reality she was a wicked
old witch who way-laid children, and built the breadhouse in order to
entice them in; but as soon as they were in her power she killed them,
cooked and ate them, and made a great festival of the day. Witches
have red eyes, and cannot see very far; but they have a fine sense of
smelling, like wild beasts, so that they know when children approach
them. When Hansel and Grethel came near the witch's house she laughed
wickedly, saying, "Here come two who shall not escape me." And early
in the morning, before they awoke, she went up to them, and saw how
lovingly they lay sleeping, with their chubby red cheeks; and she
mumbled to herself, "That will be a good bite." Then she took up
Hansel with her rough hand, and shut him up in a little cage with
a lattice-door; and although he screamed loudly it was of no use.
Grethel came next, and shaking her till she awoke, she said, "Get up,
you lazy brat, and fetch some water to cook something good for your
brother, who must remain in that stall and get fat; and when he is fat
enough I shall eat him." Grethel began to cry, but it was all useless,
for the old witch made her do as she wanted. So a nice meal was cooked
for Hansel, but Grethel got nothing else but a crab's claw.
Every morning the old witch came to the cage and said, "Hansel,
stretch out your finger that I may feel whether you are getting fat."
But Hansel used to stretch out a bone, and the old woman, having very
bad sight, thought it was his finger, and wondered very much why he
did not get fat. When four weeks had passed, and Hansel still kept
quite lean, she lost all her patience, and would not wait any longer.
"Grethel," she cried in a passion, "get some water quickly; be Hansel
fat or lean, this morning I will kill and cook him." Oh, how the poor
little sister grieved, as she was forced to fetch the water, and
fast the tears ran down her cheeks! "Dear good God, help us now!" she
prayed. "Had we only been eaten by the wild beasts in the wood, then
we should have died together." But the old witch called out, "Leave
off that noise; it will not help you a bit."
So early in the morning Grethel was compelled to go out and fill the
kettle, and make a fire. "First, we will bake, however," said the old
woman; "I have already heated the oven and kneaded the dough;" and
so saying, she pushed poor Grethel up to the oven, out of which the
flames were burning fiercely. "Creep in," said the witch, "and see if
it is hot enough, and then we will put in the bread," but she intended
when Grethel got in, to shut up the oven and let her bake, so that she
might eat her as well as Hansel. Grethel perceived her wicked thoughts
and said, "I do not know how to do it; how shall I get in?" "You
stupid goose," said she, "the opening is big enough. See, I could even
get in myself!" and she got up, and put her head into the oven. Then
Grethel gave her a push, so that she fell right in, and shutting the
iron door bolted it. Oh! how horribly the witch howled; but Grethel
ran away, and left her to burn to ashes.
Now she ran to Hansel, and, opening the door, called out, "Hansel we
are saved; the old witch is dead?"
So he sprang out, like a bird from his cage when the door was opened;
and they were so glad that they fell upon each other's neck, and
kissed each other over and over again. And now, as there was nothing
to fear, they went back to the witch's house, where in every corner
were caskets full of pearls and precious stones. "These are better
than pebbles," said Hansel, putting as many into his pocket as it
would hold; while Grethel thought, "I will take some home too," and
filled her apron full.
"We must be off now," said Hansel, "and get out of this enchanted
forest;" but when they had walked for two hours they came to a large
piece of water.
"We cannot get over," said Hansel; "I can see no bridge at all." "And
there is no boat either," said Grethel, "but there swims a white duck,
I will ask her to help us over;" and she sang,
      "Little Duck, good little Duck,
      Grethel and Hansel, together we stand;
      There is neither stile nor bridge,
      Take us on your back to land."
So the Duck came to them, and Hansel sat himself on, and bade his
sister sit beside him. "No," replied Grethel, "that will be too much
for the Duck, she shall take us over one at a time." This the good
little bird did, and when both were happily arrived on the other side,
and had gone a little way, they came to a well-known wood, which they
knew the better every step they went, and at last they perceived their
father's house. Then they began to run, and rushing into the house,
they fell upon their father's neck. He had not had one happy hour
since he had left the children in the forest; and his wife was dead.
Grethel shook her apron, and the pearls and precious stones rolled out
upon the floor, and Hansel threw down one handful after the other
out of his pocket. Then all their sorrows were ended, and they lived
together in great happiness.
SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED
A poor widow once lived in a little cottage. In front of the cottage
was a garden, in which were growing two rose trees; one of these bore
white roses, and the other red.
She had two children, who resembled the rose trees. One was called
Snow-White, and the other Rose-Red; and they were as religious and
loving, busy and untiring, as any two children ever were.
Snow-White was more gentle, and quieter than her sister, who liked
better skipping about the fields, seeking flowers, and catching summer
birds; while Snow-White stayed at home with her mother, either helping
her in her work, or, when that was done, reading aloud.
The two children had the greatest affection the one for the other.
They were always seen hand in hand; and should Snow-White say to her
sister, "We will never separate," the other would reply, "Not while
we live," the mother adding, "That which one has, let her always share
with the other."
They constantly ran together in the woods, collecting ripe berries;
but not a single animal would have injured them; quite the reverse,
they all felt the greatest esteem for the young creatures. The hare
came to eat parsley from their hands, the deer grazed by their side,
the stag bounded past them unheeding; the birds, likewise, did not
stir from the bough, but sang in entire security. No mischance befell
them; if benighted in the wood, they lay down on the moss to repose
and sleep till the morning; and their mother was satisfied as to their
safety, and felt no fear about them.
Once, when they had spent the night in the wood, and the bright
sunrise awoke them, they saw a beautiful child, in a snow-white
robe, shining like diamonds, sitting close to the spot where they had
reposed. She arose when they opened their eyes, and looked kindly at
them; but said no word, and passed from their sight into the wood.
When the children looked around they saw they had been sleeping on
the edge of a precipice, and would surely have fallen over if they had
gone forward two steps further in the darkness. Their mother said
the beautiful child must have been the angel who watches over good
children.
Snow-White and Rose-Red kept their mother's cottage so clean that it
gave pleasure only to look in. In summer-time Rose-Red attended to the
house, and every morning, before her mother awoke, placed by her bed
a bouquet which had in it a rose from each of the rose-trees. In
winter-time Snow-White set light to the fire, and put on the kettle,
after polishing it until it was like gold for brightness. In the
evening, when snow was falling, her mother would bid her bolt the
door, and then, sitting by the hearth, the good widow would read aloud
to them from a big book while the little girls were spinning. Close
by them lay a lamb, and a white pigeon, with its head tucked under its
wing, was on a perch behind.
One evening, as they were all sitting cosily together like this, there
was a knock at the door, as if someone wished to come in.
"Make haste, Rose-Red!" said her mother; "open the door; it is surely
some traveller seeking shelter." Rose-Red accordingly pulled back the
bolt, expecting to see some poor man. But it was nothing of the kind;
it was a bear, that thrust his big head in at the open door. Rose-Red
cried out and sprang back, the lamb bleated, the dove fluttered her
wings and Snow-White hid herself behind her mother's bed. The bear
began speaking, and said, "Do not be afraid: I will not do you any
harm; I am half-frozen, and would like to warm myself a little at your
fire."
"Poor bear!" the mother replied; "come in and lie by the fire; only be
careful that your hair is not burnt." Then she called Snow-White and
Rose-Red, telling them that the bear was kind, and would not harm
them. They came, as she bade them, and presently the lamb and the dove
drew near also without fear.
"Children," begged the bear; "knock some of the snow off my coat." So
they brought the broom and brushed the bear's coat quite clean.
After that he stretched himself out in front of the fire, and pleased
himself by growling a little, only to show that he was happy and
comfortable. Before long they were all quite good friends, and the
children began to play with their unlooked for visitor, pulling his
thick fur, or placing their feet on his back, or rolling him over and
over. Then they took a slender hazel twig, using it upon his thick
coat, and they laughed when he growled. The bear permitted them to
amuse themselves in this way, only occasionally calling out, when it
went a little too far, "Children, spare me an inch of life!"
When it was night, and all were making ready to go to bed, the widow
told the bear, "You may stay here and lie by the hearth, if you like,
so that you will be sheltered from the cold and from the bad weather."
The offer was accepted, but when morning came, as the day broke in
the east, the two children let him out, and over the snow he went back
into the wood.
After this, every evening at the same time the bear came, lay by the
fire, and allowed the children to play with him; so they became quite
fond of their curious playmate, and the door was not ever bolted in
the evening until he had appeared.
When springtime came, and all around began to look green and bright,
one morning the bear said to Snow-White, "Now I must leave you, and
all the summer long I shall not be able to come back."
"Where, then, are you going, dear bear?" asked Snow-White. "I have to
go to the woods to protect my treasure from the bad dwarfs. In winter
time when the earth is frozen hard, they must remain underground, and
cannot make their way through; but now that the sunshine has thawed
the earth they can come to the surface, and whatever gets into their
hands, or is brought to their caves, seldom, if ever, again sees
daylight."
Snow-White was very sad when she said good-bye to the good-natured
beast, and unfastened the door, that he might go; but in going out he
was caught by a hook in the lintel, and a scrap of his fur being torn,
Snow-White thought there was something shining like gold through the
rent; but he went out so quickly that she could not feel certain what
it was, and soon he was hidden among the trees.
One day the mother sent her children into the wood to pick up sticks.
They found a big tree lying on the ground. It had been felled, and
towards the roots they noticed something skipping and springing, which
they could not make out, as it was sometimes hidden in the grasses. As
they came nearer they could see it was a dwarf, with a shrivelled up
face and a snow-white beard an ell long. The beard was fixed in a gash
in the tree trunk, and the tiny fellow was hopping to and fro, like a
dog at the end of a string, but he could not manage to free himself.
He stared at the children, with his red, fiery eyes, and called out,
"Why are you standing there? Can't you come and try to help me?"
"What were you doing, little fellow?" enquired Rose-Red.
"Stupid, inquisitive goose!" replied the dwarf; "I meant to split the
trunk, so that I could chop it up for kitchen sticks; big logs would
burn up the small quantity of food we cook, for people like us do
not consume great heaps of food, as you heavy, greedy folk do.
The bill-hook I had driven in, and soon I should have done what
I required; but the tool suddenly sprang from the cleft, which so
quickly shut up again that it caught my handsome white beard; and
here I must stop, for I cannot set myself free. You stupid, pale-faced
creatures! You laugh, do you?"
In spite of the dwarf's bad temper, the girls took all possible pains
to release the little man, but without avail; the beard could not be
moved, it was wedged too tightly.
"I will run and get someone else," said Rose-Red.
"Idiot!" cried the dwarf. "Who would go and get more people? Already
there are two too many. Can't you think of something better?"
"Don't be so impatient," said Snow-White. "I will try to think." She
clapped her hands as if she had discovered a remedy, took out her
scissors, and in a moment set the dwarf free by cutting off the end of
his beard.
Immediately the dwarf felt that he was free he seized a sackful
of gold that was hidden among the tree roots, and, lifting it up,
grumbled out, "Clumsy creatures, to cut off a bit of my beautiful
beard, of which I am so proud! I leave the cuckoos to pay you for what
you did." Saying this, he swung the sack across his shoulder and went
off without even casting a glance at the children.
Not long afterwards the two sisters went to angle in the brook,
meaning to catch fish for dinner. As they were drawing near the water
they perceived something, looking like a large grasshopper, springing
towards the stream, as if it were going in. They hurried up to see
what it might be, and found that it was the dwarf. "Where are you
going?" said Rose-Red. "Surely you will not jump into the water?"
"I'm not such a simpleton as that!" yelled the little man. "Don't you
see that a wretch of a fish is pulling me in?"
The dwarf had been sitting angling from the side of the stream when,
by ill-luck, the wind had entangled his beard in his line, and just
afterwards a big fish taking the bait, the unamiable little fellow had
not sufficient strength to pull it out; so the fish had the advantage,
and was dragging the dwarf after it. Certainly he caught at every
stalk and spray near him, but that did not assist him greatly; he was
forced to follow all the twistings of the fish, and was perpetually in
danger of being drawn into the brook.
The girls arrived just in time. They caught hold of him firmly, and
endeavoured to untwist his beard from the line, but in vain; it was
too tightly entangled. There was nothing left but again to make use of
the scissors; so they were taken out, and the tangled portion was cut
When the dwarf noticed what they were about, he exclaimed, in a great
rage, "Is this how you damage my beard? Not content with making it
shorter before, you are now making it still smaller, and completely
spoiling it. I shall not ever dare to show my face to my friends.
I wish you had missed your way before you took this road." Then he
fetched a sack of pearls that lay among the rushes, and saying not
another word, hobbled off and disappeared behind a large stone.
Soon after this it chanced that the poor widow sent her children to
the town to purchase cotton, needles, ribbon and tape. The way to the
town ran over a common on which in every direction large masses
of rocks were scattered about. The children's attention was soon
attracted to a big bird that hovered in the air. They remarked that
after circling slowly for a time, and gradually getting nearer to
the ground, it all of a sudden pounced down amongst a mass of rock.
Instantly a heart-rending cry reached their ears, and, running quickly
to the place, they saw, with horror, that the eagle had seized their
former acquaintance, the dwarf, and was just about to carry him off.
The kind children did not hesitate for an instant. They took a firm
hold of the little man, they strove so stoutly with the eagle for
possession of his contemplated prey, that, after much rough treatment
on both sides, the dwarf was left in the hands of his brave little
friends, and the eagle took to flight.
As soon as the little man had in some measure recovered from his
alarm, his small, squeaky, cracked voice was heard saying, "Couldn't
you have held me more gently? See my little coat; you have rent and
damaged it in a fine manner, you clumsy, officious things!" Then he
picked up a sack of jewels, and slipped out of sight behind a piece of
rock.
The maidens by this time were quite used to his ungrateful, ungracious
ways; so they took no notice of it, but went on their way, made their
purchases, and then were ready to return to their happy home.
SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED]
On their way back, suddenly, once more they ran across their dwarf
friend.
Upon a clear space he had turned out his sack of jewels, so that he
could count and admire them, for he had not imagined that anybody
would at so late an hour be coming across the common. The setting sun
was shining upon the brilliant stones, and their changing hues and
sparkling rays caused the children to pause to admire them also.
"What are you gazing at?" cried the dwarf, at the same time becoming
red with rage; "and what are you standing there for, making ugly
faces?"
It is probable that he might have proceeded in the same complimentary
manner, but suddenly a great growl was heard near by them, and a big
bear joined the party. Up jumped the dwarf in extremest terror, but
could not get to his hiding-place, the bear was too close to him; so
he cried out in very evident anguish--
"Dear Mr. Bear, forgive me, I pray! I will render to you all my
treasure. Just see those precious stones lying there! Grant me my
life! What would you do with such an insignificant little fellow?
You would not notice me between your teeth. See, though, those
two children, they would be delicate morsels, and are as plump as
partridges; I beg of you to take them, good Mr. Bear, and let me go."
But the bear would not be moved by his speeches. He gave the
ill-disposed creature a blow with his paw, and he lay lifeless on the
ground. Meanwhile, the maidens were running away, making off for home
as well as they could; but all of a sudden they were stopped by a
well-known voice that called out, "Snow-White, Rose-Red, stay! Do not
fear. I will accompany you."
The bear quickly came towards them, but as he reached their side,
suddenly the bear-skin slipped to the ground, and there before them
was standing a handsome man, completely garmented in gold, who said,
"I am a king's son, who was enchanted by the wicked dwarf lying
over there. He stole my treasure, and compelled me to roam the woods
transformed into a big bear until his death should set me free.
Therefore he has only received a well-deserved punishment."
[Illustration: "THE BEARSKIN SLIPPED TO THE GROUND."]
Then Rose-Red and Snow-White and the Prince all went back to the
cottage, and some time afterwards Snow-White married the Prince, and
Rose-Red, his brother, who shared between them the enormous treasure
which the dwarf had collected in his cave.
The old mother spent many happy years with her children. The two
rose-trees she took with her when she left the cottage, and they grew
in front of her window, where they continued to bear each year the
most beautiful roses, red and white.
THE SLEEPING BEAUTY
Once upon a time there lived a king and queen who had no children; and
this they lamented very much. But one day, as the queen was walking by
the side of the river, a little fish lifted its head out of the water,
and said, "Your wish shall be fulfilled, and you shall soon have a
daughter."
What the little fish had foretold soon came to pass; and the Queen had
a little girl who was so very beautiful that the king could not cease
looking on her for joy, and determined to hold a great feast. So he
invited not only his relations, friends, and neighbours, but also all
the fairies, that they might be kind and good to his little daughter.
Now there were thirteen fairies in his kingdom, and he had only twelve
golden dishes for them to eat out of, so that he was obliged to leave
one of the fairies without an invitation. The rest came, and after the
feast was over they gave all their best gifts to the little princess;
one gave her virtue, another beauty, another riches, and so on till
she had all that was excellent in the world. When eleven had done
blessing her, the thirteenth, who had not been invited, and was very
angry on that account, came in, and determined to take her revenge.
So she cried out, "The King's daughter shall in her fifteenth year be
wounded by a spindle, and fall down dead." Then the twelfth, who had
not yet given her gift, came forward and said that the bad wish
must be fulfilled, but that she could soften it, and that the king's
daughter should not die, but fall asleep for a hundred years.
But the king hoped to save his dear child from the threatened evil,
and ordered that all the spindles in the kingdom should be bought up
and destroyed. All the fairies' gifts were in the meantime fulfilled;
for the princess was so beautiful, and well-behaved, and amiable, and
wise, that everyone who knew her loved her. Now it happened that on
the very day she was fifteen years old the king and queen were not
at home, and she was left alone in the palace. So she roved about by
herself, and poked at all the rooms and chambers, till at last she
came to an old tower, to which there was a narrow staircase ending
with a little door. In the door there was a golden key, and when she
turned it the door sprang open, and there sat an old lady spinning
away very busily.
"Why, how now, good mother," said the princess, "what are you doing
there?"
"Spinning," said the old lady, and nodded her head.
"How prettily that little thing turns round!" said the princess, and
took the spindle and began to spin. But scarcely had she touched it
before the prophecy was fulfilled, and she fell down, as if lifeless,
on the ground.
However, she was not dead, but had only fallen into a deep sleep; and
the king and queen, who just then came home, and all their court, fell
asleep too, and the horses slept in the stables, and the dogs in the
court, the pigeons on the house-top, and the flies on the walls. Even
the fire on the hearth left off blazing, and went to sleep; and the
meat that was roasting stood still; and the cook, who was at that
moment pulling the kitchen-boy by the hair to give him a box on the
ear for something he had done amiss, let him go, and both fell asleep;
and so everything stood still, and slept soundly.
A large hedge of thorns soon grew around the palace, and every year it
became higher and thicker, till at last the whole place was surrounded
and hidden, so that not even the roof or the chimneys could be seen.
But there went a report, through all the land, of the beautiful
sleeping Briar Rose (for so was the king's daughter called) so that
from time to time several kings' sons came, and tried to break through
the thicket into the palace. This they could never do; for the thorns
and bushes laid hold of them as it were with hands, and there they
stuck fast and died miserably.
[Illustration: "ALL WAS SO QUIET THAT HE COULD HEAR EVERY BREATH HE
DREW."]
After many years came yet another king's son into that land, and
an old man told him the story of the thicket of thorns, and how a
beautiful palace stood behind it, in which was a wondrous princess,
called Briar Rose, asleep with all her court. He told, too, how he had
heard from his grandfather that many, many princes had come, and had
tried to break through the thicket, but had stuck fast and died.
Then the young prince said, "All this shall not frighten me; I will
go and see Briar Rose." The old man tried to dissuade him, but he
persisted in going.
Now that very day were the hundred years completed; and as the prince
came to the thicket he saw nothing but beautiful flowering shrubs,
through which he passed with ease, and they closed after him, as firm
as ever. Then he came at last to the palace, and there in the court
lay the dogs asleep, and the horses in the stables, and on the roof
sat the pigeons fast asleep with their heads under their wings; and
when he came into the palace, the flies slept on the walls, and the
cook in the kitchen was still holding up her hand as if she would beat
the boy, and the maid with her pail in her hand was going a-milking.
Then he went on still further, and all was so quiet that he could hear
every breath he drew; till at last he came to the old tower and opened
the door of the little room in which Briar Rose was, and there she lay
fast asleep, and looked so beautiful that he could not turn his eyes
away, and he stooped down and gave her a kiss. But the moment he
kissed her she opened her eyes and awoke, and smiled upon him. For the
spell was broken.
Then they went out together, and presently the king and queen also
awoke, and all the court, and they gazed on each other with great
wonder. And the horses got up and shook themselves, and the dogs
jumped about and barked; the pigeons took their heads from under their
wings, and looked around and flew into the fields; the flies on the
walls buzzed; the fire in the kitchen blazed up and cooked the dinner,
and the roast meat turned round again; the cook gave the boy the box
on his ear so that he cried out, and the maid went to milk the cows.
And then was the wedding of the prince and Briar Rose celebrated, and
they lived happily together all their lives long.
THE SLEEPING BEAUTY]
      More close and close his footsteps wind:
      The Magic Music in his heart
      Beats quick and quicker, till he find
      The quiet chamber far apart.
                                            Tennyson]
PRINCE CHÉRI
There was once a king who was such an honourable man that his subjects
called him "The Good King."
One day while he was out hunting, a little rabbit that his dogs were
about to kill, threw itself into his arms. The King caressed the
little creature, and said:
"As you have put yourself under my protection nobody shall harm you,"
and he carried the rabbit to his palace, and ordered a pretty little
hutch to be made for it.
That night when he was alone in his room, there appeared a lovely
lady. She wore a robe as white as snow, and a wreath of white roses on
her head. She addressed him thus:
"I am the Fairy Candide; I wished to see if you were as good as
everybody declares you are, and for this reason I changed myself into
the little rabbit, and ran to you in my distress, for I know that
those who have pity for dumb creatures have still more pity for
mankind. I have come to thank you for what you did and to say that I
shall always be your friend, and will grant any request you would now
like to make."
"Madam," replied the King, "I have one only son whom I love devotedly;
he is named Prince Chéri; if you have any good will for me, be a
friend to my son."
"Willingly," responded the Fairy, "I will make your son the most
handsome prince in the world, or the richest, or the most powerful;
choose which you will for him."
"I desire none of these things," replied the King, "but I shall be
very much obliged if you will make him the best of all princes, for
what good would it do to him to be handsome, rich, or powerful if he
were wicked? You know he would be unhappy, for it is only goodness
which brings content."
"You are right," answered the Fairy, "but that I cannot do; Prince
Chéri must himself strive to become good. All that I can promise is
that I will give him good advice, and punish him for his faults, if he
will not himself correct them."
And with this the father had to rest content.
Not long afterwards the good King died, and two days later the Fairy
appeared to Prince Chéri.
"I promised your father to be your friend," she told him; "here is a
little gold ring, take care of it, for it is worth more than diamonds.
Every time that you are about to do any wrong action it will prick
you. If, in spite of the pricks, you continue your bad actions, you
will lose my friendship and I shall become your enemy."
Saying this the Fairy vanished, leaving the Prince very much
astonished.
For some time Chéri behaved so well that the ring did not prick
at all, but one day when he returned from the chase, having caught
nothing, he felt so ill-humoured, that when his dog Bibi came fawning
upon him, he kicked the poor, faithful creature from him. At that
moment the ring pricked like a pin running into his finger.
"What is this?" he exclaimed: "the Fairy must be mocking me, surely
I've done no great harm in kicking an animal that annoyed me. What's
the use of being ruler of a great empire if I may not treat my dog as
I will?"
"I am not mocking you," he heard in reply to his thoughts; "you have
been bad tempered, and you have behaved unkindly to a poor animal who
did not deserve such treatment. I know you are higher than a dog, but
the advantage of being ruler of a great empire is not in doing all the
harm one wishes, but in doing all the good one can."
Chéri promised to be better, but he did not keep his word, and so the
ring often pricked him, sometimes until his finger bled, and at last,
in anger, he threw it away.
Now he thought he would be truly happy, and he gave way to any foolish
fancies and wrong wishes that came into his head, until he really
became very wicked and was disliked by everyone.
One day when he was out walking he saw a girl named Zélie, who was so
beautiful that he resolved to marry her.
But Zélie was as good as she was beautiful, and said to him:
"Sir, I am only a shepherdess and have no fortune, but, in spite of
that, I will never marry you, for although I should be a Queen, and
you are handsome and rich, your evil behaviour would make me hate
you."
Upon this, Chéri flew into a passion, and ordered his officers to
carry Zélie to the Palace, but she was not used unkindly there, for
the Prince loved her.
However, after a while, urged by his foster-brother, a bad man who
encouraged Chéri in his wickedness, the young man rushed in a rage to
the room in which Zélie was confined, determined that, if she still
refused to marry him, the very next day she should be sold as a slave.
Great was his surprise, on entering the apartment, to find the captive
had disappeared, for he carried the key of the door in his pocket.
ZÉLIE AND THE FAIRY CANDIDE "PRINCE CHÉRI"]
Amongst those at the Royal Court was a Councillor named Suliman, a man
of a noble mind, who had often dared to tell the Prince of his faults,
and had at first been thanked for this, but later on Chéri grew angry
that anyone should presume to blame him while all others at the Court
were full of flattery and praise, but in his heart of hearts the
Prince respected this good man, and this the wicked flatterers knew
full well, and therefore feared lest he should come into the Prince's
favour.
So now they falsely said, that it was Suliman who had helped Zélie
to escape, and beyond himself with fury, Chéri commanded his
foster-brother to send soldiers to bring Suliman to him in chains,
like a criminal.
After giving these orders Chéri retired to his chamber, but scarcely
had he entered, when the earth trembled, there came a great clap of
thunder, and the Fairy Candide appeared before him.
"I promised your father," said she in a stern voice, "to give you
good advice, and to punish you if you refused to follow it. You
have despised my counsels and your crimes have converted you into a
monster, the horror of heaven and earth. Now it is time to fulfill my
promise of punishment. I condemn you to take the resemblance of the
beasts you are like in disposition--A lion, because of your fury--a
wolf, on account of your greediness--a serpent, for destroying him who
has been your second father--a bull, by reason of your brutality."
Hardly had the Fairy pronounced these words, when Chéri perceived with
horror that his body had been transformed.
He had a lion's head, a bull's horns, the feet of a wolf, and the
tail of a viper. At the same moment he found himself in a forest, and
there, after roaming about miserably for some time, he fell into a
pit dug by hunters. He was captured and led into the capital of his
Kingdom.
On the way thither instead of acknowledging that he had brought this
evil plight upon himself, he bit at his chains, and cursed the Fairy.
As he was nearing the city great rejoicings were seen on every side,
and, on the hunters enquiring the reason, they were told that Prince
Chéri, whose only pleasure it was to torment his people, had been
crushed to death in his chamber by a thunder-bolt, a just punishment
for his offences. Four of his wicked companions had tried to partition
the Kingdom between them, but the people would have none such to rule,
and they had offered the crown to the good and wise Suliman. Chéri
panted with rage on hearing this, and in the Palace Square he saw
Suliman on a superb throne, and all the people who shouted with joy,
and wished him a long life to repair the evil brought about by their
former sovereign. "I accept the throne," said Suliman, "but it is to
preserve it for Prince Chéri. A fairy has revealed to me that he
is not dead, and possibly will return to you as virtuous as in his
earliest years. Alas!" cried Suliman, bursting into tears, "his
flatterers have ruined him, I know that at heart he is good." These
words moved Chéri to sorrow for his crimes, and he felt that he had
not been punished as severely as he deserved, and he now resolved to
amend his faults.
Therefore he obeyed the man who had charge over him, and who
constantly cruelly beat him, and one day when this keeper lay asleep,
and a tiger who had broken loose was about to devour him, Chéri fought
the fierce beast, and saved the man's life.
Then a voice was heard saying, "a good action shall be rewarded!" and,
to Chéri's joy he was instantaneously transformed into a pretty little
dog which the keeper carried to the Queen.
The Queen was delighted with him, but, for fear he should grow bigger,
she gave him only small pieces of bread to eat, so that poor Chéri
nearly died of hunger.
One day he carried his little piece of bread into the garden to eat it
there, but wandering with it in his mouth, still further on, he saw a
young girl pale and thin, and almost fainting for want of food.
"I am hungry," thought Chéri, "but if I give my breakfast to this
poor thing, perhaps I shall save her life." He placed his bread in the
girl's hand, and she ate it hungrily. Just then he heard loud cries,
and saw that it was the beautiful Zélie struggling to free herself
from four men who were carrying her into a house near by.
Chéri, longing to help her, followed them barking, and although the
men kicked him savagely, he would not leave the place. Presently from
a window was thrown a plateful of tempting-looking food. Chéri was
just about to devour it, when the girl to whom he had given the bread,
rushed forward and throwing her arms around him cried,
[Illustration: "COME, MY CHILDREN, I AM GOING TO TRANSPORT YOU TO YOUR
PALACE."]
"Poor little dog, do not touch that food, it is poisoned." Just then
a voice was heard saying, "You see that a good action meets with
reward," and at the same time Chéri was changed into a pretty white
pigeon. For several days he flew around hoping to catch sight of
Zélie, and at last, seated by a hermit, outside a cave, he found
her. Fluttering down he alighted upon her shoulder. Zélie stroked his
feathers whispering that she now accepted his gift and would love
him always, and at that moment Chéri regained his natural figure,
and Fairy Candide appeared in place of the hermit whose form she had
taken. "Come, my children," said she, "I am going to transport you
to your Palace, that Chéri may receive his crown of which he has now
become worthy," and hardly had she ceased speaking, when they found
themselves in Suliman's presence. The worthy Governor was delighted to
behold his dear master, and gladly resigned the throne to him. Chéri
and Zélie reigned long and happily, and we are told that the ring,
which the Prince now wore again, never once severely pricked him.
THE WHITE CAT
There was once a King who had three sons, all handsome and brave, but
it came to his ears that they wished to reign now instead of waiting
until he died, he therefore determined to divert their minds by making
promises the fulfilment of which he would always be able to evade. So
he called them to his room and spoke: "You must agree with me, my
dear children, that at my great age I cannot manage the business of
my kingdom as I used to do, and as I am intending retiring into the
country, it seems to me that a clever, faithful dog would be very good
company, and I promise you that whichever brings me the most beautiful
little dog at once succeeds to the kingdom."
The Princes were much surprised to hear their father's wish for a
little dog, but agreed with pleasure to go in search of one. They said
goodbye to the King, who gave them money and jewels, announcing that
in a year he should expect them to return, all on the same day and at
the same hour, bringing to him their little dogs.
[Illustration: "ON A CERTAIN NIGHT, DURING A STORM OF THUNDER AND
RAIN, HE LOST HIS WAY."]
Then the Princes set out, each by a different road, agreeing in a
year's time to meet at a certain place a short distance from their
The two elder met with many adventures, but it is only the youngest
that we shall follow.
This youngest Prince was very courteous, merry, clever and
accomplished, he was tall, handsome, and all that a prince should be.
Very seldom a day passed without his buying dogs, little dogs, big
dogs, sporting dogs, spaniels, hounds, dogs of all sorts. When he
found a beautiful one and then came across a still better, he let the
first one go, for being alone--the Princes had declined to take any
attendants--he could not take charge of thirty or forty thousand dogs.
He travelled on, keeping to one road, until on a certain night, during
a storm of thunder and rain, he lost his way, and after some wandering
arrived at a most superb castle where nobody was to be seen but about
a dozen hands all holding torches. Other hands pushed him forwards,
and guided him through one apartment after another, all so rich in
precious stones and beautiful paintings, that it was like enchantment.
After passing through sixty rooms, the hands stopped him, and here the
wet garments of the Prince were taken away, and he was clad in raiment
of the most exquisite description. The hands then conducted him into
a banqueting hall, where entered a little figure, not two feet high,
covered with a long black crepe veil, followed by a great procession
of cats.
The Prince was too much astonished to move. The little figure
approached him, raising the veil, and he saw the most beautiful White
Cat he had ever beheld.
Addressing the Prince she said:
"King's son! welcome! my Feline Majesty sees you with pleasure!"
"Madame Cat," replied the Prince, "it is very good of you to receive
me thus, but you are not an ordinary cat; being able to speak, and
possessing this superb castle, are proof of that."
After they had conversed a little while, supper was served to them,
during which the Prince entertained the Cat by telling her all sorts
of news, and he discovered that she was well informed as to what was
taking place in the world.
Supper over, various cats came in, dressed in fancy costumes, and
danced a ballet, then the White Cat bid her visitor good-night, and
the hands which had conducted him before, led him to a bed-chamber.
Early the next morning the hands awoke him, and dressing him in a
handsome hunting costume, led him to the courtyard, where he found the
White Cat upon a splendid monkey, with about five hundred other cats
assembled, all ready for the chase; and never had the Prince enjoyed
anything so much, for although mounted only upon a wooden horse, he
rode at a great pace.
Day after day passed in such delights as made the Prince almost forget
his own country.
"Alas!" said he to the White Cat again and again, "how sad I shall be
to leave you! I love you so dearly! Either become a woman, or change
me into a cat!"
A year passes very quickly when one has no care or trouble, and is
enjoying life. But the White Cat knew when the Prince should return
home, and reminded him, saying, "Don't you know you have only three
days to look for the little dog for your father, and that your
brothers will have found the most beautiful?"
Then the Prince came to himself, and cried, "By what charm have you
made me forget what is so important? Where shall I find the dog, and a
horse swift enough for such a journey?" And he was in great distress.
The White Cat comforted him, however, saying that the wooden horse
would take him to his journey's end sufficiently quickly, and that she
would herself also provide the little dog; then she handed to him
a walnut, saying, "Put your ear to this shell and you will hear him
barking."
So the Prince met his brothers, and they came into the King's
presence.
The two elder sons had brought little dogs so delicate and small that
one hardly dared to touch them, and none could decide which should
have the kingdom. Then the youngest took from his pocket the nut the
Cat had given to him, and there was seen a little dog so tiny that
it could go through a ring without touching it; he was also able to
dance, and play the castanets, while his ears touched the ground.
The King was embarassed, for it was impossible to find a flaw in this
lovely little creature.
However as he did not desire to part with his crown, he declared that
they had succeeded so well in their first quest that now he should
like them to search, by land and sea, for a piece of linen so fine
that it would pass through the eye of a very small needle.
Then the three Princes set out once more, but the youngest mounted his
wooden horse and repaired at once to the White Cat, who was rejoiced
to see him, and the second year passed by as the first had done.
When the day came round appointed by the King for the return of his
sons, the two elder appeared before him, and, without awaiting the
arrival of their brother, displayed their pieces of linen, which were
of a fineness quite astonishing. But although they would pass through
the eye of a large needle, through the small needle the King had
selected they would not go.
There was much murmuring at this, and while the brothers were
disputing the King's decision, a charming sound was heard of trumpets
and other musical instruments.
It was the youngest Prince who arrived in a chariot with out-riders
and numerous attendants, all of which had been provided for him by the
White Cat.
After respectfully greeting his father and embracing his brothers, he
took out of a jewelled box a nut which he broke. On breaking the
nut he found a cherry stone, the stone was broken and there was the
kernel, in the kernel was a grain of corn, in the grain of corn a
millet seed, and within that a piece of linen so fine that it passed
six times through the smallest needle's eye, and moreover on it were
exquisite paintings of people and places without number.
The King heaved a deep sigh, and turning to his children said,
"Nothing pleases me, in my old age, so much as your deference to my
desires, and I wish to prove you once more. Travel for a year, and he
who at the end of the year brings home the most beautiful girl shall
marry her, and be crowned king on his marriage. I promise you that I
will not defer this reward any longer."
Our Prince saw the injustice of all this; his little dog and piece
of linen were worth ten kingdoms, not only one; but he was too well
brought up to go against his father's wishes, and, mounting into his
chariot, with his retinue, he returned to the White Cat's Castle.
"Well! King's son!" said the White Cat, "you have returned once more
without your crown?"
"Madam," answered the Prince, "your gifts should have gained it for
me, but I am convinced that the King would have more pain in giving it
up than I should have pleasure in possessing it!"
"Never mind," she replied, "you shall not neglect anything that may
deserve it; and if you must conduct a beautiful girl to your father's
court, I will look for one so that you may gain the prize. Meanwhile
let us be happy."
If the Cat had not taken pains to remember the time when he must
return to the court, the Prince would surely have forgotten it. On the
evening before, she told him that she would bring him to one of the
most beautiful Princesses in the world, that at last the hour had
arrived to destroy the fatal work of an evil fairy, and to do this he
must make up his mind to cut off her head and tail, which he was at
once to throw into the fire.
"I," cried the Prince, "Blanchette that I love: do you think I should
be cruel enough to kill you? No doubt, you wish to prove my heart
which will certainly never forget what I owe to you for your
kindness."
"No! King's son," she continued, "I don't think you are ungrateful. Do
this that I beseech you, and then we shall begin to be happy with one
another, by the faith and honour of a cat, believe that I am truly
your friend."
Tears flowed from the Prince's eyes even at the thought, and he said
all that he could to avoid it, but she urged him so vehemently that
at last he took his sword and tremblingly cut off the head and tail of
his dear friend the Cat.
In the same moment took place the most marvellous change imaginable.
The body of the White Cat grew large, and was transformed into that
of a girl; how, one could not say; one only knew it was so. Her figure
was majestic, her manners charming, her whole appearance beautiful
beyond words.
Then there entered an immense number of lords and ladies, who carrying
their cats' skins, or with them thrown across their shoulders, came
and cast themselves at the feet of the Queen, expressing their joy at
seeing her again in her rightful form.
She received them all with a kindness which showed the goodness of her
heart, and then turning to the Prince she told the story of her life,
and how by a wicked enchantment she had been transformed into a White
Cat.
"But it is you, my Prince, who have freed me," she concluded; "as soon
as I saw you I knew my troubles were at an end."
They set out forthwith in a splendid carriage. As they drew near the
castle, at the place where the three brothers were to meet, the Queen
entered into a little crystal rock ornamented with precious stones,
and this was carried by richly dressed young men.
The Prince who had remained in the carriage, saw his brothers,
approaching with wondrously beautiful ladies.
On being questioned he told them that all he had brought was a little
[Illustration: "THE BODY OF THE WHITE CAT GREW LARGE AND WAS
TRANSFORMED INTO THAT OF A GIRL."]
They began to laugh at him, and drove on followed by the young Prince,
while after him was brought the crystal rock.
Arrived at the Palace the two elder Princes dismounted with their
marvellous Princesses.
The King received them graciously, and did not know to which to award
the prize.
He looked at his youngest son and said, "This time, then, you have
come alone." "Your Majesty will see in this rock a little White
Cat who mews sweetly and has soft little velvet paws," answered the
Prince.
The King smiled, and himself went to open the rock. But, as he came
near, the Queen, with a touch, made it shatter to pieces, and from out
of it she appeared like the sun that has been hidden by clouds; her
fair hair was spread over her shoulders, and fell in waves to her
feet, and she was robed in a gown of white and rose-colour.
She made a deep curtsey to the King who, struck with admiration, could
not help exclaiming,
"Here is one who is matchless, and she deserves my crown."
"Sire," she answered, "I have not come to take away the throne that
you fill with such dignity; I was born heir to six kingdoms, allow
me to offer you one, and one of them I give to each of your sons. In
return all I ask of you is this young Prince for my husband. We shall
still have three kingdoms."
The King and all the Court uttered loud cries of joy. The marriage was
at once celebrated, also that of the other two Princes; and in such a
manner that the Court spent several months in fêtes of all sorts.
Then each one of them departed to govern his kingdom, the White Cat
making herself ever remembered as much by her kindness and generosity
as by her rare merit and beauty.
BLUEBEARD
In the long ago times, in a splendid house, surrounded by fine
gardens and a park, there lived a man who had riches in abundance, and
everything to make him popular except one, and that was his beard, for
his beard was neither black as a raven's wing, golden as the sunlight,
nor just an ordinary every-day colour, but it was blue, bright blue.
Of course had blue beards come into fashion his would have been
considered beautiful beyond words, but, as far as we know, blue beards
have never as yet been fashionable, nor are they likely to be so.
However, in spite of his blue beard this man had married several
times, though what had become of his wives nobody could say.
Now, not far from Bluebeard's house there dwelt a widow with two very
lovely daughters, and one of these Bluebeard wished to marry, but
which he did not mind, they might settle that between themselves.
Neither of these girls had the least desire to have a husband with a
blue beard, and also, not knowing the fate of the other wives, they
did not like to risk disappearing from the world as those had done,
but being very polite young women they would not refuse Bluebeard's
proposals outright. The younger said, "I would not for a moment take
away Sister Anne's chance of marrying such a wealthy man," while
Sister Anne declared that, although the elder, she would much prefer
to give way to her sister. And so it went on for some time.
Then Bluebeard invited the widow and her daughters to spend a week
with him, and many of their neighbours he also invited.
Most sumptuous was the entertainment provided for them. Hunting and
fishing expeditions, picnics and balls went on from morning till
night, and all the night through, so that there was not time even to
think of sleep, only feasting and pleasure the whole week long.
So well, indeed, did the younger sister enjoy this, that by the end of
the week she had begun to think perhaps after all her host's beard was
not so very blue, and that it would be a fine thing to be the mistress
of such a magnificent mansion, and the wife of such a rich husband.
And so, not long afterwards, there was a grand wedding, and the
widow's younger daughter became Mrs. Bluebeard.
About a month later, Bluebeard told his wife that he must leave her
for several weeks, having to travel on business.
"While I am absent, my dear," said he, "invite your relations and
friends and enjoy yourself just as you please in entertaining them.
See here are my keys, the keys of the rooms and of the chests where I
keep my money, my gold and silver plate, and my jewels. Unlock rooms
and chests and use freely what you will."
"This small key," he added, pointing to quite a little one, "is the
key of the door at the end of the lower landing, you will not need to
use this at all. In fact, should you open that door, or even put this
key into the lock, I should be dreadfully angry, indeed I should make
you suffer for it in a terrible way."
Then Bluebeard bid his wife good-bye, and departed.
As soon as Mrs. Bluebeard's friends and relations knew that her
husband was away, they came flocking to visit her, for they longed to
see all her splendid possessions, but had feared to come before.
They could not enough admire the magnificent apartments, and ran from
one to another praising everything they beheld.
But the young wife heeded nothing they said or did, all she thought
of was that little key which she must not use, wondering more and more
why she ought not to open that one particular door.
At last she could bear it no longer, but slipping away from her
visitors, she ran along the passages and stairs, nearly falling down
them, so great was her haste, until she came to that door at the end
of the corridor.
Not pausing an instant, she thrust the key into the lock, and the door
sprang open.
At first she could distinguish nothing, for the room was dark and
gloomy, but then, all of a sudden, she knew what had become of
Bluebeard's other wives, for there they lay, in a long, straight row,
all dead. She stood horrified for a moment or two, gazing at the
pale faces, and long hair spread out around them, then picking up
the little key which she had taken from the lock but dropped in her
fright, she hastily quitted the room, shut and locked the door, and
ran to her own chamber to calm herself before returning to her guests.
But she was unable to rest for an instant, so dreadful were her
feelings; then with terror she noticed that on the key there was a
stain. She wiped it with her handkerchief, but alas! it was blood that
would not be wiped away. She washed the key and rubbed it, and
scraped it and polished it, but all to no purpose, if she succeeded
in cleansing one side, the mark came out on the other. For the key was
enchanted.
BLUEBEARD]
That same evening Bluebeard returned saying he had met the man whom
he was wanting to see, and so the long journey was unnecessary, and he
was rejoiced to be at home again.
Next morning he called for the keys; his wife brought them to him,
but not the little one; that she left behind. Bluebeard noticed this
directly and sent her to fetch it. Trembling, and white as a sheet,
she was forced to give it into his hand.
"Ha! what is this?" he cried, "what is this stain that I see!"
His poor wife trembled still more, and could not speak.
"Wretched woman!" shouted Bluebeard, "you have used this key, you have
unlocked the door of that room at the end of the passage. You shall
die!!!"
In vain did his wife plead with him to spare her, kneeling before him
with tears streaming from her eyes. "You shall die!" he cried again,
more savagely than before.
"Let me have a few moments alone, to prepare for death,"
"Half a quarter of an hour, but not a moment longer," he replied, and
left her.
The poor young woman hastened to a room at the foot of the turret
stairs where was her Sister Anne, and called to her.
"Sister Anne, Sister Anne, look from the tower window. Can you see no
one coming?" And Sister Anne, looking out, answered:
"Alas! No! Nothing but the green grass, and the sun which shines upon
it."
Bluebeard shouted from below that the time was almost up.
"Sister Anne, Sister Anne, look once again, can you see no one
coming?" whispered the young wife wringing her hands. Her brothers,
she knew, were to visit her that day--if only they would come in time!
"Alas, No!" Sister Anne replied. "I see a cloud of dust, but it is
only a flock of sheep on the road."
But now Bluebeard bawled out so loudly for his wife to come down, that
the whole house shook.
"Sister Anne, Sister Anne, tell me is no one coming?"
"I see two horsemen afar off," cried Sister Anne. "I will beckon to
them to hasten hither."
But Bluebeard would wait not a moment longer, and nearly dead with
terror his wife descended, still entreating him to spare her life.
He would not, however, give heed to her prayers, and was just
brandishing his sword, so that it might come down straight and true
upon her slender neck, when the door burst open and two young army
officers came rushing in, whom Bluebeard recognised as the brothers
of his wife. He swiftly fled, but they speedily followed, and for his
many crimes slew him then and there.
All his wealth now belonged to his widow, and she gratefully rewarded
her brothers by purchasing them commissions in the army; she settled
a large sum of money upon her sister, and after a while she married
again, and with a good husband lived a happy life.
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST
Once upon a time, a long while ago, there was a Beast.
He was a Great Beast, and lived in a Great Castle that stood in the
middle of a Great Park, and everybody in the country held the Beast in
great fear. In fact everything about the Beast was great; his roar was
great and terrific and could be heard for miles around the park, and
when he roared the people trembled.
Nobody ever saw the Beast, which was by no means remarkable, for the
Beast never came out of his Park, and no one, I can assure you, ever
ventured on to his estate.
But matters were not allowed to remain like this for ever, for
something very wonderful happened to the Beast and to somebody else,
and if that something had not happened this story would never have
been written.
About two miles and three quarters from the Castle gates there lived
a rich merchant and his three daughters. The two elder girls were ugly
disagreeable things, and although they had all they could wish for to
make them happy they were always grumbling; but the youngest daughter,
whose name was Beauty, was very pretty, and her nature was happy and
good, her presence was sunshine, and she was the joy of her father's
heart.
Well, one day the two elder sisters had something to grumble about
with a vengeance, for a telegram arrived to say that the merchant was
no longer a rich merchant, for he had lost all his money.
So the horses and carriages had to be sold, and everything that was
of value was got rid of, the servants were sent away, and the merchant
and his daughters had to do their own work.
Dear me, it was shocking, the way those two sisters grumbled, but
Beauty, oh dear no, she was all smiles, for her heart was as sunny as
ever, as she rolled up the sleeves of her print frock, and cooked the
dinner, and scrubbed the floors, and made herself useful, here, there,
and everywhere.
Things had been going on like this for about three months, when one
fine morning another telegram boy came with another telegram to say
that somebody who owed the merchant a great deal of money was ready to
pay the debt, and all the merchant had to do was to go to the city and
get it.
Of course, everybody was delighted at this good news, and the merchant
didn't waste any time, but started off to the city at once.
"Mind you bring me something back," said the eldest daughter as he was
starting.
"What shall it be?" asked the merchant.
"A white satin dress trimmed with lace and pearls," said his eldest
daughter.
"And you must bring me something too, please, father," said the second
"And what do you want," asked the merchant.
"A purse full of gold so that I can buy what I want myself," said the
second daughter.
"I will try and do what you both ask," he said, "and what shall I
bring for my Beauty?"
"I will wait a little for my dresses and things," replied the smiling
Beauty, as she helped her father on with his cloak, "but I should like
you to bring me home a rose, a lovely red rose, if you can."
So her father kissed her, and promised he would bring her the rose,
and went on his way full of hopes.
What a pity it is that our hopes cannot be always realized, and that
we are so often doomed to disappointment! When the merchant arrived at
the city, to his dismay he found that the man who owed him the money
was still unable to pay him, the man had been disappointed himself at
the last moment.
So the unhappy father had to return home without the white satin dress
trimmed with lace and pearls, and without the bag of money, and he
dreaded meeting his two daughters, for he knew they would be terribly
angry.
Now on his way home from the station to his house he had to pass by
part of the wall that surrounded the Great Park where the Great Beast
lived in his Great Castle; and as he passed by a corner of the wall
what should he see hanging just over the top, and just within his
reach if he stood on his toes, but a lovely red rose.
"At any rate I can take my Beauty what she asked for," he said to
himself, and, without so much as giving a thought to the wrong he was
doing, he stood on his toes and plucked the rose.
He was sorry he did it.
Of a sudden there was a roar, such a roar that the very ground shook,
and as to the poor merchant he quivered like a leaf.
Enough to make him quiver indeed, for a gate in the wall suddenly
opened, and out rushed the Beast.
Yes, the Beast, if you please, and he seized the merchant by the
scruff of his neck, and dragged him into the Park, and shut the gate
after him.
"Don't you know it's a sin to steal?" roared the Beast. "How dare you
steal my roses? I am going to kill you."
"Oh, mercy, Mr. Beast," cried the unhappy man, flinging himself on his
knees before the monster.
"I'm going to kill you," roared the Beast still more loudly. "It's
taken years to cultivate this sort of rose, and--and I'm going to
kill you. Unless," he added after a pause, "you send me one of your
daughters here instead."
"All right," said the merchant and got on his feet again.
"She must be here to-morrow by breakfast time, and I breakfast early,"
said the Beast, as he let the merchant out of the gate. "If she is not
here, I shall come for you, and don't you forget it."
It was by no means likely that he would forget it, in fact he could
think of nothing else. He hurried home and told his dreadful news, and
received a dreadful scolding from his two elder daughters, who were
angry at not getting their presents.
"And it is Beauty's fault that you have got into this trouble," they
said. "Beauty and her stupid rose. Beauty had better get you out of
the trouble." Beauty said little, but smiled on, with sunshine in her
heart, and trust in her loving nature, and cooked the dinner.
[Illustration: "WHEN SHE CAME TO THE GATE IN THE WALL SHE KNOCKED UPON
IT THREE TIMES"]
Early next morning when the dawn was breaking she left her father's
house, leaving a little note behind her begging him not to be anxious
but that she had gone to the Beast's castle.
When she came to the gate in the wall she knocked upon it three
times and it opened as if by magic, for she could see no one. And she
stepped into the garden of red roses, and in the distance across the
Park she saw the Castle, and she thought she had never seen anything
so beautiful. For it was built of mother-of-pearl, and the red and
yellow gleams of the rising sun shone upon its glistening walls, and
lit them up with a thousand radiant lights.
Beauty marvelled at the loveliness and walked on. And when she arrived
at this beautiful Castle, the huge gates opened as if by magic, and
the doors opened as if by magic, for never a soul did she see, nor
living thing of any sort.
And in the great hall was the breakfast table laid for two. It was
a nice breakfast with steaming hot dishes, and jams, honey, and hot
rolls, and brightly polished silver, and sweet flowers.
Then the Beast appeared suddenly from behind a curtain; oh, he was
an awful Beast, and Beauty's heart beat fast! But he seemed a polite
Beast for all that.
He handed Beauty a chair, and when she had sat down said:
"I bid you welcome; which do you take, tea or coffee?"
"Tea please," answered Beauty.
"Then pour it out," he said, "and I'll take tea too, please. Eggs, do
you like eggs hard or soft?"
"I always cook mine three minutes and a half," replied Beauty.
"Half a minute too much, I think. But you shall have just what you
like."
And so she had; not only at the breakfast table but in everything. She
had only to express a wish and it was immediately gratified. She
had ponies to ride, and dogs and cats, and pet birds, and the most
beautiful dresses ever worn by real princesses.
And if it had not been that she was away from her father she would
really have been happy.
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST]
The Beast was most kind and attentive to her, and told her that he
loved her, and three times a day he asked her to marry him, but Beauty
shook her head and said, oh no, she couldn't.
Well, Beauty had been at the great Castle some time when she began to
pine to go home and see her father, and she begged the Beast to let
her go.
"Very good," he said with a great sigh, "you may go home to-day, but
promise me that you will be back early to-morrow morning. If you do
not come back early I am sure I shall die for I love you so dearly."
So Beauty promised and went home, and she took presents for her father
and her sisters, and when the sisters heard of all the wonderful
things at the great Castle, they were envious and jealous, and made up
their minds to do Beauty and the Beast a great injury.
So they mixed something in Beauty's supper that made her sleep nearly
all the next day, and so she did not keep her promise. It was evening
when she arrived at the gate in the wall, instead of early morning.
But she knocked three times and the gate opened by magic, and she went
through the garden and hurried to the Castle, that shone like fire in
the light of the setting sun. And the huge gates opened by magic, and
the doors opened by magic, and she stood in the great hall, but there
was no Beast there. She searched in all the rooms but he was not
there; with fear and anxiety in her heart she ran into the gardens,
and there she found him at last. Found him lying stretched out on the
grass, and she thought he was dead.
"Oh, dear darling Beast," she cried, as she threw herself on her knees
beside him, and raised his ugly head, "dear Beast, do not die, for
I love you with all my heart, and will marry you to-morrow." And she
kissed him. Then of a sudden he sprang to his feet, but no longer
the Beast, no longer a hideous monster, but a beautiful prince most
beautifully dressed. "Dearest," he said, "a wicked fairy turned me
into this brute form until a day should come when a good girl like you
should tell me that she loved me. And you will marry me to-morrow."
"Oh, yes," answered Beauty, "but the wicked fairy could not change
your nature. I would have married you if you had remained just as you
were."
And so they married and lived happy ever afterwards, and they took
care of Beauty's father until the end of his days; so he was happy,
and they forgave the two sisters and gave them fine dresses and
jewels, and the two sisters turned over a new leaf and were less
selfish, and they were happy, so this is a very happy ending to the
story.
What a pity all stories can't end the same way!
TUFTY RIQUET
There was once upon a time a Queen who had the ugliest little baby
imaginable, so ugly, indeed, that it was almost impossible to believe
he was a little boy at all.
A fairy, however, assured his mother that the little baby would be
very good and clever, saying that she was also giving him a gift which
would enable him to make that person whom he loved the best as clever
as himself.
This somewhat consoled the Queen, but still she was very unhappy
because her son was so ugly, though no sooner had he begun to speak
than he could talk about all sorts of things, and he had such pretty
ways that people were charmed with him.
I forgot to say, that, when he was quite a baby, he had a funny little
tuft of hair on his head, so he was called Tufty Riquet, for Riquet
was the family name.
When Riquet was about seven years old, the Queen of a kingdom near by
was given two baby daughters, twins, of which one was so exquisitely
beautiful that the Queen nearly died of joy when she saw her, and so
the fairy, the same one who had given Riquet his gift of cleverness,
to keep the Queen from making herself ill with excitement, told her
that this little Princess would not be at all clever, indeed she would
be as stupid as she was beautiful.
The Queen was very much grieved at this, and felt still more troubled
when she beheld her other daughter, for the second Princess was
extremely ugly.
"Do not take it too much to heart, madam," remarked the fairy, "for
this second daughter will be so clever that it will scarcely be
noticed that she is not beautiful."
"Well, if it must be so, it must," remarked the Queen, "but I should
certainly have liked the elder one, who is beautiful, to be just a
little bit clever too."
"I can do nothing as to her mind, madam," replied the fairy, "but for
her beauty I can, and as there is nothing I would not do to please
you, I will give her a gift so that she can make the one who wins her
heart beautiful too."
As the Princesses grew up, their gifts likewise grew with them, so
that everybody spoke about the beauty of the one and the cleverness
of the other; but also their defects grew, so that it could not but
be noticed that the younger was daily uglier, and the elder day by
day became more stupid, until she either said nothing in reply to a
question, or something quite silly, and so clumsy was she that she
could not arrange four china ornaments on the chimney piece without
breaking one, or drink a glass of water without spilling half of it on
her frock.
Although it is a great thing to have beauty, yet the younger generally
received more attention in company than her elder sister.
At first, everybody would gather around the beautiful one admiringly,
but before long they would leave her for the clever Princess, to
listen to her pleasant conversation; and by the end of a quarter of
an hour the elder would be left alone, while the other would be the
centre of a group.
This the elder sister noticed, in spite of her stupidity, and she
would gladly have given all her beauty for half the cleverness of
her sister, and sometimes the Queen, although full of kindness, would
reproach her daughter for her foolishness, which caused the Princess
almost to die of grief.
One day when she had retreated to a wood to brood over her
unhappiness, she saw a little man coming towards her. He was
uncommonly ugly and unpleasing in appearance, but was very richly
dressed.
It was the young Prince Tufty Riquet, who had fallen in love with the
pictures he had seen of her, and had left his father's kingdom for the
sake of making her acquaintance.
Delighted to meet her alone in this manner, he accosted her as
courteously as possible, but soon, noticing that she was melancholy,
he said:
"I cannot understand how it is that anyone as beautiful as you are,
can be as sad as you appear to be; for I must own, that although I
can boast of having seen many beauties, not one have I ever met whose
beauty equalled yours."
"It pleases you to say so, sir," replied the Princess, and relapsed
into silence.
"Beauty," went on Riquet, "is so delightful that one would give
everything for it, and if anyone is beautiful I can't understand
anything troubling greatly."
"I would rather be as ugly as you," answered the Princess, "and be
clever, than as beautiful as I am, and be stupid."
"To think you are stupid is a sure sign that you have a certain amount
of cleverness, madam," replied Riquet.
"I don't think about that," said the Princess, "but I am quite sure
that I am very silly, and the grief of that is killing me."
"If that is all that troubles you, I can soon put an end to your
grief," said Riquet, "for I have the power of giving cleverness to the
person whom I love the best, and if only you will marry me, you shall
become as clever as you can wish."
The Princess was greatly astonished, but remained silent.
"I can see," continued Riquet, "that this proposal is not to your
taste, and I am not astonished. I will give you a year to think about
So great was the longing of the Princess to be clever, that she at
once promised Riquet to marry him in a year's time, and no sooner had
she made the promise than a great change took place in her, and she
found she could say all sorts of pleasant things, on all sorts of
subjects, in quite an easy manner.
She at once began a conversation with Riquet, making such brilliant
remarks, that he could almost think he had given her all his
cleverness and had kept none for himself.
When the Princess returned to the Palace, everybody was astonished
at the sudden and extraordinary change, for, instead of saying stupid
things, or just nothing at all, she was now full of beautiful ideas
which she expressed most charmingly.
The report of this transformation was soon spread abroad, and all
the young Princes of the neighbouring kingdoms asked for her hand in
marriage, but not one did she find altogether suitable.
However, at last one arrived, who was so powerful, rich, clever and
handsome, that she could not help approving of him, and her father,
noticing this, told her she was quite free to choose what husband she
wished.
The Princess thanked him, and asked for time to consider the matter.
Then, to think it over, she went by chance, into the wood where she had
met Tufty Riquet.
While she was walking, deep in thought, she noticed a loud noise
beneath her feet, as of many persons hastening to and fro; then,
listening attentively, she heard a voice say, "Bring me the saucepan,"
and another voice cry, "Put some wood on the fire."
At the same moment the earth opened and she saw a big kitchen full
of cooks, and all sorts of things necessary for the making of a
magnificent banquet, and everybody hard at work.
The Princess, astonished at this sight, asked the men for whom they
were working.
"For the Prince Tufty Riquet," answered the head cook, "for to-morrow
is his wedding day."
The Princess, more surprised than ever, all at once recollected that
it was just a year ago that very day that she had promised to marry
the ugly Tufty Riquet.
[Illustration: "TO THINK IT OVER SHE WENT INTO THE WOOD."]
The reason that she had not remembered her promise before was that she
was foolish when she made it, and in becoming clever she had forgotten
all her former stupidities.
She had only walked on a few steps further, when Riquet appeared
before her, magnificently clad, as a Prince about to marry.
"Here you see me, madam," said he, "keeping my word, and I have no
doubt that you also came here to keep yours, and by giving me your
hand to make me the happiest of men."
"I frankly confess," replied the Princess, "that I have not yet made
up my mind, and I do not think I can ever do as you wish."
"You surprise me, madam," said Riquet.
"I can quite believe that," said the Princess, "and if you were not
a good and clever man, I should not know how to act. But you are well
aware that it was when I was stupid I promised to marry you, but now,
as you may imagine, I am not so easily pleased."
"Except for my ugliness," said Riquet, "have you anything against me?
Do you object to my birth, my character, or my manners?"
"Not at all," replied the Princess, "I love those things in you."
"If that is so," answered Riquet, "I shall indeed be made happy,
because you can cause me to become the most delightful of men if only
you will desire it. For know, madam, the same fairy who at my birth
gave me the power to impart cleverness to whomsoever I should love,
gave you a gift also, that of being able to render beautiful the one
to whom you would grant this favour."
"If that is the case," exclaimed the Princess, "I desire with all my
heart that you might be the most handsome and pleasing Prince in the
world."
No sooner had the Princess uttered these words than her wish was
fulfilled, though some say that no change really took place in Riquet,
but that the Princess loved him now so much that all his ugliness was
seen as beauty by her eyes.
However that may be, she straightway consented to be his bride, and,
as the preparations had already been made, the wedding took place the
very next day.
THE BEAUTIFUL PRINCESS--"TUFTY RIQUET"]
THUMBLING
There was once a poor woodman sitting by the fire in his cottage and
his wife sat by his side spinning. "How lonely it is," said he, "for
you and me to sit here by ourselves without any children to play about
and amuse us, while other people seem so happy and merry with their
children!" "What you say is very true," said the wife, sighing, and
turning her wheel; "how happy should I be if I had but one child! and
if it were ever so small, nay, if it were no bigger than my thumb, I
should be very happy, and love it dearly." Now it came to pass that
this good woman's wish was fulfilled just as she desired; for, some
time afterwards, she had a little boy, who was quite healthy and
strong, but not much bigger than my thumb. So they said, "Well, we
cannot say we have not got what we wished for, and, little as he is,
we will love him dearly;" and they called him Thumbling.
They gave him plenty of food, yet he never grew bigger, but remained
just the same size as when he was born; still, his eyes were sharp and
sparkling and he soon showed himself to be a clever little fellow,
who always knew well what he was about. One day, as the woodman was
getting ready to go into the wood to cut fuel, he said, "I wish I had
some one to bring the cart after me, for I want to make haste." "Oh,
father!" cried Thumbling, "I will take care of that; the cart shall
be in the wood by the time you want it." Then the woodman laughed and
said, "How can that be? You cannot reach up to the horse's bridle."
"Never mind that, father," said Thumbling; "if my mother will only
harness the horse, I will get into his ear, and tell him which way to
go." "Well," said the father, "we will try for once."
When the time came, the mother harnessed the horse to the cart, and
put Thumbling into its ear; and as he sat there, the little man told
the beast how to go, crying out, "Go on," and "Stop," as he wanted;
so the horse went on just as if the woodman had driven it himself into
the wood. It happened that, as the horse was going a little too fast,
and Thumbling was calling out "Gently, gently!" two strangers came up.
"What an odd thing that is!" said one, "there is a cart going along,
and I heard a carter talking to the horse but can see no one." "That
is strange," said the other; "let us follow the cart and see where it
goes." So they went on into the wood, till at last they came to the
place where the woodman was. Then Thumbling, seeing his father, cried
out, "See, father, here I am, with the cart, all right and safe; now
take me down." So his father took hold of the horse with one hand, and
with the other took his son out of the ear; then he put him down upon
a straw, where he sat as merry as you please. The two strangers were
all this time looking on, and did not know what to say for wonder. At
last one took the other aside and said, "That little urchin will make
our fortune if we can get him, and carry him about from town to town
as a show; we must buy him." So they went to the woodman and asked him
what he would take for the little man: "He will be better off," said
they, "with us than with you." "I won't sell him at all," said the
father, "my own flesh and blood is dearer to me than all the silver
and gold in the world." But Thumbling, hearing of the bargain they
wanted to make, crept up his father's coat to his shoulder, and
whispered in his ear, "Take the money, father, and let them have me;
I'll soon come back to you."
So the woodman at last agreed to sell Thumbling to the strangers for
a large piece of gold. "Where do you like to sit?" said one of them.
"Oh! put me on the rim of your hat, that will be a nice gallery for
me; I can walk about there, and see the country as we go along."
So they did as he wished; and when Thumbling had taken leave of his
father, they carried him away with them. They journeyed on till it
began to be dusky, and then the little man said, "Let me get down,
I'm tired." So the man took off his hat and set him down on a clod of
earth in a ploughed field by the side of the road, But Thumbling ran
about amongst the furrows, and at last slipped into a mouse-hole.
"Good-night, masters," said he, "I'm off! mind and look sharp after me
the next time." They ran directly to the place, and poked the ends
of their sticks into the mouse-hole, but all in vain; Thumbling only
crawled further and further in, and at last it became quite dark, so
they were obliged to go their way without their prize, as sulky as you
please.
When Thumbling found they were gone, he came out of his hiding-place.
"What dangerous walking it is," said he, "in this ploughed field! If
I were to fall from one of these great clods, I should certainly break
my neck." At last, by good chance, he found a large empty snail-shell.
"This is lucky," said he, "I can sleep here very well," and in he
crept. Just as he was falling asleep he heard two men passing, and one
said to the other, "How shall we manage to steal that rich parson's
silver and gold?" "I'll tell you," cried Thumbling. "What noise was
that?" said the thief, frightened. "I am sure I heard some one speak."
They stood still listening, and Thumbling said, "Take me with you,
and I'll soon show you how to get the parson's money." "But where are
you?" said they. "Look about on the ground," answered he, "and listen
where the sound comes from." At last the thieves found him out, and
lifted him up in their hands. "You little urchin!" said they, "what
can you do for us?" "Why, I can get between the iron window-bars of
the parson's house, and throw you out whatever you want." "That's a
good thought," said the thieves: "come along, we shall see what you
can do."
When they came to the parson's house, Thumbling slipped through the
window-bars into the room, and then called out as loudly as he could
bawl, "Will you have all that is here?" At this the thieves were
frightened, and said "Softly, softly, speak low that you may not
awaken anybody." But Thumbling pretended not to understand them, and
bawled out again, "How much will you have? Shall I throw it all out?"
Now the cook lay in the next room, and hearing a noise she raised
herself in her bed and listened. Meanwhile the thieves were
frightened, and ran off to a little distance; but at last they plucked
up courage, and said, "The little urchin is only trying to make fools
of us." So they came back and whispered softly to him, saying, "Now,
let us have no more of your jokes, but throw out some of the money."
Then Thumbling called out as loudly as he could, "Very well; hold out
your hands, here it comes." The cook heard this quite plainly, so she
sprang out of bed and ran to open the door. The thieves rushed off as
if a wolf were at their heels; and the maid, having groped about
and found nothing, went away for a light. By the time she returned,
Thumbling had slipped off into the barn; and when the cook had looked
about and searched every hole and corner, and found nobody, she went
to bed, thinking she must have been dreaming with her eyes open. The
little man crawled about in the hay-loft, and at last found a glorious
place to finish his night's rest in; so he laid himself down, meaning
to sleep till daylight, and then find his way home to his father and
mother. But, alas! how cruelly was he disappointed! what crosses and
sorrows happen in this world! The cook got up early, before daybreak,
to feed the cows: she went straight to the hay loft, and carried away
a large bundle of hay with the little man in the middle of it fast
asleep. He still, however, slept on, and did not wake till he found
himself in the mouth of the cow, who had taken him up with a mouthful
of hay: "Good lack-a-day!" said he, "how did I manage to tumble into
the mill?" But he soon found out where he really was, and was obliged
to have all his wits about him in order that he might not get between
the cow's teeth, and so be crushed to death. At last she swallowed him
down. "It is rather dark here," said he; "they forgot to build windows
in this room to let the sun in; a candle would be no bad thing."
Though he made the best of his bad luck, he did not like his quarters
at all; and the worst of it was, that more and more hay was always
coming down, and the space in which he was became smaller and smaller.
At last he cried out as loudly as he could, "Don't bring me any more
hay! Don't bring me any more hay!" The maid happened to be just then
milking the cow, and hearing someone speak and seeing nobody, and
yet being quite sure it was the same voice that she had heard in the
night, she was so much frightened that she fell off her stool and
overset the milk-pail. She ran off as fast as she could to her master,
the parson, and said, "Sir, sir, the cow is talking!" But the parson
said, "Woman, thou art surely mad!" However, he went with her into the
cow-house to see what was the matter. Scarcely had they set their feet
on the threshold when Thumbling called out, "Don't bring me any more
hay!" Then the parson himself was frightened; and thinking the cow was
surely bewitched, ordered that she should be killed directly. So the
cow was killed, and the part in which Thumbling lay was thrown away.
Thumbling soon set himself to work to get out, which was not a very
easy task; but at last, just as he had made room to get his head
through, a new misfortune befell him: a hungry wolf passed by
and swallowed Thumbling and all, at a single gulp, and ran away.
Thumbling, however, was not disheartened; and thinking the wolf would
not dislike having some chat with him as he was going along, he called
out, "My good friend, I can show you a famous treat." "Where's that?"
said the wolf. "In such and such a house," said Thumbling, describing
his father's house, "you can crawl through the drain into the kitchen,
and there you will find cakes, ham, beef, and everything your heart
can desire." The wolf did not want to be asked twice; so that very
night he went to the house and crawled through the drain into the
kitchen, and ate and drank there to his heart's content. As soon as he
was satisfied, he wanted to get away; but he had eaten so much that
he could not get out the same way that he came in. This was just what
Thumbling had reckoned upon; and he now began to set up a great shout,
making all the noise he could. "Will you be quiet?" said the wolf,
"you'll awaken everybody in the house." "What's that to me?" said the
little man, "you have had your frolic, now I've a mind to be merry
myself;" and he began again singing and shouting as loudly as he
could.
The woodman and his wife, being awakened by the noise, peeped through
a crack in the door; but when they saw that the wolf was there, you
may well suppose that they were terribly frightened; and the woodman
ran for his axe, and gave his wife a scythe. "Now do you stay behind,"
said the woodman; "and when I have knocked him on the head, do you
cut him open with the scythe." Thumbling heard all this, and said,
"Father, father! I am here; the wolf has swallowed me;" and his father
said, "Heaven be praised! we have found our dear child again;" and
he told his wife not to use the scythe, for fear she should hurt
him. Then he aimed a great blow, and struck the wolf on the head, and
killed him on the spot; and when he was dead they cut open his body
and set Thumbling free. "Ah!" said the father, "what fears we have had
for you!" "Yes, father," answered he, "I have travelled all over the
world, since we parted, in one way or other; and now I am very glad to
get fresh air again." "Why, where have you been?" said the father. "I
have been in a mouse-hole, in a snail-shell, down a cow's throat, and
inside the wolf; and yet here I am again safe and sound." "Well," said
they, "we will not sell you again for all the riches in the world." So
they hugged and kissed their dear little son, and gave him plenty to
eat and drink, and fetched new clothes for him, for his old ones were
quite spoiled on his journey.
Hans had served his Master seven years, and at the end of that time he
said to him: "Master, since my time is up, I should like to go home to
my mother; so give me my wages, if you please."
His Master replied, "You have served me truly and honestly, Hans, and
such as your service was, such shall be your reward;" and with these
words he gave him a lump of gold as big as his head. Hans thereupon took
his handkerchief out of his pocket, and, wrapping the gold up in it,
threw it over his shoulder and set out on the road toward his native
village. As he went along, carefully setting one foot to the ground
before the other, a horseman came in sight, trotting gaily and briskly
along upon a capital animal. "Ah," said Hans, aloud, "what a fine thing
that riding is! one is seated, as it were, upon a stool, kicks against
no stones, spares one's shoes, and gets along without any trouble!"
The Rider, overhearing Hans making these reflections, stopped and said,
"Why, then, do you travel on foot, my fine fellow?"
"Because I am forced," replied Hans, "for I have got a bit of a lump to
carry home; it certainly is gold, but then I can't carry my head
straight, and it hurts my shoulder."
"If you like we will exchange," said the Rider. "I will give you my
horse, and you can give me your lump of gold."
"With all my heart," cried Hans; "but I tell you fairly you undertake a
very heavy burden."
The man dismounted, took the gold, and helped Hans on to the horse, and,
giving him the reins into his hands, said, "Now, when you want to go
faster, you must chuckle with your tongue and cry, 'Gee up! gee up!'"
Hans was delighted indeed when he found himself on the top of a horse,
and riding along so freely and gaily. After a while he thought he should
like to go rather quicker, and so he cried, "Gee up! gee up!" as the man
had told him. The horse soon set off at a hard trot, and, before Hans
knew what he was about, he was thrown over head and heels into a ditch
which divided the fields from the road. The horse, having accomplished
this feat, would have bolted off if he had not been stopped by a Peasant
who was coming that way, driving a cow before him. Hans soon picked
himself up on his legs, but he was terribly put out, and said to the
countryman, "That is bad sport, that riding, especially when one mounts
such a beast as that, which stumbles and throws one off so as to nearly
break one's neck. I will never ride on that animal again. Commend me to
your cow: one may walk behind her without any discomfort, and besides
one has, every day for certain, milk, butter, and cheese. Ah! what would
I not give for such a cow!"
"Well," said the Peasant, "such an advantage you may soon enjoy; I will
exchange my cow for your horse."
To this Hans consented with a thousand thanks, and the Peasant, swinging
himself upon the horse, rode off in a hurry.
Hans now drove his cow off steadily before him, thinking of his lucky
bargain in this wise: "I have a bit of bread, and I can, as often as I
please, eat with it butter and cheese, and when I am thirsty I can milk
my cow and have a draught: and what more can I desire?"
As soon, then, as he came to an inn he halted, and ate with great
satisfaction all the bread he had brought with him for his noonday and
evening meals, and washed it down with a glass of beer, to buy which he
spent his two last farthings. This over, he drove his cow farther, but
still in the direction of his mother's village. The heat meantime became
more and more oppressive as noontime approached, and just then Hans came
to a common which was an hour's journey across. Here he got into such a
state of heat that his tongue clave to the roof of his mouth, and he
thought to himself: "This won't do; I will just milk my cow, and refresh
myself." Hans, therefore tied her to a stump of a tree, and, having no
pail, placed his leathern cap below, and set to work, but not a drop of
milk could he squeeze out. He had placed himself, too, very awkwardly,
and at last the impatient cow gave him such a kick on the head that he
tumbled over on the ground, and for a long time knew not where he was.
Fortunately, not many hours after, a Butcher passed by, trundling a
young pig along upon a wheelbarrow. "What trick is this!" exclaimed he,
helping up poor Hans; and Hans told him that all that had passed. The
Butcher then handed him his flask and said, "There, take a drink; it
will revive you. Your cow might well give no milk: she is an old beast,
and worth nothing at the best but for the plough or the butcher!"
"Eh! eh!" said Hans, pulling his hair over his eyes, "who would have
thought it? It is all very well when one can kill a beast like that at
home, and make a profit of the flesh; but for my part I have no relish
for cow's flesh; it is too tough for me! Ah! a young pig like yours is
the thing that tastes something like, let alone the sausages!"
"Well now, for love of you," said the Butcher, "I will make an exchange,
and let you have my pig for your cow."
"Heaven reward you for your kindness!" cried Hans; and, giving up the
cow, he untied the pig from the barrow and took into his hands the
string with which it was tied.
Hans walked on again, considering how everything had happened just as he
wished, and how all his vexations had turned out for the best after all!
Presently a boy overtook him carrying a fine white goose under his arm,
and after they had said "Good-day" to each other, Hans began to talk
about his luck, and what profitable exchanges he had made. The Boy on
his part told him that he was carrying the goose to a christening-feast.
"Just lift it," said he to Hans, holding it up by its wings, "just feel
how heavy it is; why, it has been fattened up for the last eight weeks,
and whoever bites it when it is cooked will have to wipe the grease from
each side of his mouth!"
"Yes," said Hans, weighing it with one hand, "it is weighty, but my pig
is no trifle either."
While he was speaking the Boy kept looking about on all sides, and
shaking his head suspiciously, and at length he broke out, "I am afraid
it is not all right about your pig. In the village through which I have
just come, one has been stolen out of the sty of the mayor himself; and
I am afraid, very much afraid, you have it now in your hand! They have
sent out several people, and it would be a very bad job for you if they
found you with the pig; the best thing you can do is to hide it in some
dark corner!"
Honest Hans was thunderstruck, and exclaimed, "Ah, Heaven help me in
this fresh trouble! you know the neighbourhood better than I do; do you
take my pig and let me have your goose," said he to the boy.
"I shall have to hazard something at that game," replied the Boy, "but
still I do not wish to be the cause of your meeting with misfortune;"
and, so saying, he took the rope into his own hand, and drove the pig
off quickly by a side-path, while Hans, lightened of his cares, walked
on homeward with the goose under his arm. "If I judge rightly," thought
he to himself, "I have gained even by this exchange: first there is a
good roast; then the quantity of fat which will drip out will make goose
broth for a quarter of a year; and then there are fine white feathers,
which, when once I have put into my pillow I warrant I shall sleep
without rocking. What pleasure my mother will have!"
As he came to the last village on his road there stood a Knife-grinder,
with his barrow by the hedge, whirling his wheel round and singing:
    "Scissors and razors and such-like I grind;
     And gaily my rags are flying behind."
Hans stopped and looked at him, and at last he said, "You appear to have
a good business, if I may judge by your merry song?"
"Yes," answered the Grinder, "this business has a golden bottom! A true
knife-grinder is a man who as often as he puts his hand into his pocket
feels money in it! But what a fine goose you have got; where did you buy
it?"
"I did not buy it at all," said Hans, "but took it in exchange for my
pig." "And the pig?" "I exchanged for my cow." "And the cow?" "I
exchanged a horse for her." "And the horse?" "For him I gave a lump of
gold as big as my head." "And the gold?" "That was my wages for a seven
years' servitude." "And I see you have known how to benefit yourself
each time," said the Grinder; "but, could you now manage that you heard
the money rattling in your pocket as you walked, your fortune would be
made."
"Well! how shall I manage that?" asked Hans.
"You must become a grinder like me; to this trade nothing peculiar
belongs but a grindstone; the other necessaries find themselves. Here is
one which is a little worn, certainly, and so I will not ask anything
more for it than your goose; are you agreeable?"
"How can you ask me?" said Hans; "why, I shall be the luckiest man in
the world; having money as often as I dip my hand into my pocket, what
have I to care about any longer?"
So saying, he handed over the goose, and received the grindstone in
exchange.
"Now," said the Grinder, picking up an ordinary big flint stone which
lay near, "now, there you have a capital stone upon which only beat them
long enough and you may straighten all your old nails! Take it, and use
it carefully!"
Hans took the stone and walked on with a satisfied heart, his eyes
glistening with joy. "I must have been born," said he, "to a heap of
luck; everything happens just as I wish, as if I were a Sunday-child."
Soon, however, having been on his legs since daybreak, he began to feel
very tired, and was plagued too with hunger, since he had eaten all his
provision at once in his joy about the cow bargain. At last he felt
quite unable to go farther, and was forced, too, to halt every minute
for the stones encumbered him very much. Just then the thought overcame
him, what a good thing it were if he had no need to carry them any
longer, and at the same moment he came up to a stream. Here he resolved
to rest and refresh himself with drink, and so that the stones might not
hurt him in kneeling he laid them carefully down by his side on the
bank. This done, he stooped down to scoop up some water in his hand, and
then it happened that he pushed one stone a little too far, so that both
presently went plump into the water. Hans, as soon as he saw them
sinking to the bottom, jumped up for joy, and then kneeled down and
returned thanks, with tears in his eyes, that so mercifully, and without
any act on his part, and in so nice a way, he had been delivered from
the heavy stones, which alone hindered him from getting on.
"So lucky as I am," exclaimed Hans, "is no other man under the sun!"
Then with a light heart, and free from every burden, he leaped gaily
along till he reached his mother's house.
II
WHY THE SEA IS SALT
Once on a time, but it was a long, long time ago, there were two
brothers, one rich and one poor. Now, one Christmas eve, the poor one
hadn't so much as a crumb in the house, either of meat or bread, so he
went to his brother to ask him for something to keep Christmas with, in
God's name. It was not the first time his brother had been forced to
help him, and you may fancy he wasn't very glad to see his face, but he
"If you will do what I ask you to do, I'll give you a whole flitch of
bacon."
So the poor brother said he would do anything and was full of thanks.
"Well, here is the flitch," said the rich brother, "and now go straight
to Hell."
"What I have given my word to do, I must stick to," said the other; so
he took the flitch and set off. He walked the whole day, and at dusk he
came to a place where he saw a very bright light.
"Maybe this is the place," said the man to himself. So he turned aside,
and the first thing he saw was an old, old man, with a long white beard,
who stood in an outhouse, hewing wood for the Christmas fire.
"Good even," said the man with the flitch.
"The same to you; whither are you going so late?" said the man.
"Oh! I'm going to Hell, if I only knew the right way," answered the poor
man.
"Well, you're not far wrong, for this is Hell," said the old man; "when
you get inside they will be all for buying your flitch, for meat is
scarce in Hell; but, mind you don't sell it unless you get the
hand-quern which stands behind the door for it. When you come out, I'll
teach you how to handle the quern, for it's good to grind almost
anything."
So the man with the flitch thanked the other for his good advice, and
gave a great knock at the Devil's door.
When he got in, everything was just as the old man had said. All the
devils, great and small, came swarming up to him like ants round an
anthill, and each tried to outbid the other for the flitch.
"Well!" said the man, "by rights, my old dame and I ought to have this
flitch for our Christmas dinner; but since you have all set your hearts
on it, I suppose I must give it up to you; but if I sell it at all, I'll
have for it the quern behind the door yonder."
At first the Devil wouldn't hear of such a bargain, and chaffed and
haggled with the man; but he stuck to what he said, and at last the
Devil had to part with his quern. When the man got out into the yard, he
asked the old woodcutter how he was to handle the quern; and after he
had learned how to use it, he thanked the old man and went off home as
fast as he could, but still the clock had struck twelve on Christmas eve
before he reached his own door.
"Wherever in the world have you been?" said his old dame; "here have I
sat hour after hour waiting and watching, without so much as two sticks
to lay together under the Christmas brose."
"Oh!" said the man, "I couldn't get back before, for I had to go a long
way first for one thing, and then for another; but now you shall see
what you shall see."
So he put the quern on the table, and bade it first of all grind lights,
then a table-cloth, then meat, then ale, and so on till they had got
everything that was nice for Christmas fare. He had only to speak the
word, and the quern ground out what he wanted. The old dame stood by
blessing her stars, and kept on asking where he had got this wonderful
quern, but he wouldn't tell her.
"It's all one where I got it from; you see the quern is a good one, and
the mill-stream never freezes, that's enough."
So he ground meat and drink and dainties enough to last out till Twelfth
Day, and on the third day he asked all his friends and kin to his house,
and gave a great feast. Now, when his rich brother saw all that was on
the table, and all that was behind in the larder, he grew quite spiteful
and wild, for he couldn't bear that his brother should have anything.
"Twas only on Christmas eve," he said to the rest, "he was in such
straits that he came and asked for a morsel of food in God's name, and
now he gives a feast as if he were count or king;" and he turned to his
brother and said:
"But whence, in Hell's name, have you got all this wealth?"
"From behind the door," answered the owner of the quern, for he didn't
care to let the cat out of the bag. But later on in the evening, when he
had got a drop too much, he could keep his secret no longer, and brought
out the quern and said:
"There, you see what has gotten me all this wealth;" and so he made the
quern grind all kind of things. When his brother saw it, he set his
heart on having the quern, and, after a deal of coaxing, he got it; but
he had to pay three hundred dollars for it, and his brother bargained to
keep it till hay-harvest, for he thought, if I keep it till then, I can
make it grind meat and drink that will last for years. So you may fancy
the quern didn't grow rusty for want of work, and when hay-harvest came,
the rich brother got it, but the other took care not to teach him how to
handle it.
It was evening when the rich brother got the quern home, and the next
morning he told his wife to go out into the hay-field and toss, while
the mowers cut the grass, and he would stay at home and get the dinner
ready. So, when dinner-time drew near, he put the quern on the kitchen
table and said:
"Grind herrings and broth, and grind them good and fast."
So the quern began to grind herrings and broth; first of all, all the
dishes full, then all the tubs full, and so on till the kitchen floor
was quite covered. Then the man twisted and twirled at the quern to get
it to stop, but for all his twisting and fingering the quern went on
grinding, and in a little while the broth rose so high that the man was
like to drown. So he threw open the kitchen door and ran into the
parlour, but it wasn't long before the quern had ground the parlour full
too, and it was only at the risk of his life that the man could get hold
of the latch of the house door through the stream of broth. When he got
the door open, he ran out and set off down the road, with the stream of
herrings and broth at his heels, roaring like a waterfall over the whole
farm.
Now, his old dame, who was in the field tossing hay, thought it a long
time to dinner, and at last she said:
"Well! though the master doesn't call us home, we may as well go. Maybe
he finds it hard work to boil the broth, and will be glad of my help."
The men were willing enough, so they sauntered homeward; but just as
they had got a little way up the hill, what should they meet but
herrings, and broth, and bread, all running and dashing, and splashing
together in a stream, and the master himself running before them for his
life, and as he passed them he bawled out: "Would to heaven each of you
had a hundred throats! but take care you're not drowned in the broth."
Away he went, as though the Evil One were at his heels, to his brother's
house, and begged him for God's sake to take back the quern that
instant; for, said he:
"If it grinds only one hour more, the whole parish will be swallowed up
by herrings and broth."
But his brother wouldn't hear of taking it back till the other paid him
down three hundred dollars more.
So the poor brother got both the money and the quern, and it wasn't long
before he set up a farmhouse far finer than the one in which his
brother lived, and with the quern he ground so much gold that he covered
it with plates of gold; and as the farm lay by the sea-side, the golden
house gleamed and glistened far away over the sea. All who sailed by,
put ashore to see the rich man in the golden house, and to see the
wonderful quern, the fame of which spread far and wide, till there was
nobody who hadn't heard tell of it.
So one day there came a skipper who wanted to see the quern; and the
first thing he asked was if it could grind salt.
"Grind salt!" said the owner; "I should just think it could. It can
grind anything."
When the skipper heard that, he said he must have the quern, cost what
it would; for if he only had it, he thought he should be rid of his long
voyages across stormy seas for a lading of salt. Well, at first the man
wouldn't hear of parting with the quern; but the skipper begged and
prayed so hard that at last he let him have it, but he had to pay many,
many thousand dollars for it. Now, when the skipper had got the quern on
his back, he soon made off with it, for he was afraid lest the man
should change his mind; so he had no time to ask how to handle the
quern, but got on board his ship as fast as he could, and set sail.
When he had sailed a good way off, he brought the quern on deck and
"Grind salt, and grind both good and fast."
Well, the quern began to grind salt so that it poured out like water;
and when the skipper had got the ship full, he wished to stop the quern,
but whichever way he turned it, and however much he tried, it was no
good; the quern kept grinding on, and the heap of salt grew higher and
higher, and at last down sunk the ship.
There lies the quern at the bottom of the sea, and grinds away at this
very day, and that's why the sea is salt.
III
THE LAD WHO WENT TO THE NORTH WIND
Once on a time there was an old widow who had one son and, as she was
poorly and weak, her son had to go up into the safe to fetch meal for
cooking; but when he got outside the safe, and was just going down the
steps, there came the North Wind, puffing and blowing, caught up the
meal, and so away with it through the air. Then the lad went back into
the safe for more; but when he came out again on the steps, if the North
Wind didn't come again and carry off the meal with a puff; and more than
that, he did so the third time. At this the lad got very angry; and as
he thought it hard that the North Wind should behave so, he thought he'd
just look him up, and ask him to give up his meal.
So off he went, but the way was long, and he walked and walked; but at
last he came to the North Wind's house.
"Good day!" said the lad, and "thank you for coming to see us
yesterday."
"GOOD DAY!" answered the North Wind, for his voice was loud and gruff,
"AND THANKS FOR COMING TO SEE ME. WHAT DO YOU WANT?"
"Oh!" answered the lad, "I only wished to ask you to be so good as to
let me have back that meal you took from me on the safe steps, for we
haven't much to live on; and if you're to go on snapping up the morsel
we have there'll be nothing for it but to starve."
"I haven't got your meal," said the North Wind; "but if you are in such
need, I'll give you a cloth which will get you everything you want, if
you only say, 'Cloth, spread yourself, and serve up all kinds of good
dishes!'"
With this the lad was well content. But, as the way was so long he
couldn't get home in one day, he turned into an inn on the way; and when
they were going to sit down to supper, he laid the cloth on a table
which stood in the corner and said:
"Cloth spread yourself, and serve up all kinds of good dishes."
He had scarce said so before the cloth did as it was bid; and all who
stood by thought it a fine thing, but most of all the landlady. So,
when all were fast asleep, at dead of night, she took the lad's cloth,
and put another in its stead, just like the one he had got from the
North Wind, but which couldn't so much as serve up a bit of dry bread.
So, when the lad woke, he took his cloth and went off with it, and that
day he got home to his mother.
"Now," said he, "I've been to the North Wind's house, and a good fellow
he is, for he gave me this cloth, and when I only say to it, 'Cloth,
spread yourself, and serve up all kinds of good dishes,' I get any sort
of food I please."
"All very true, I dare say," said his mother; "but seeing is believing,
and I shan't believe it till I see it."
So the lad made haste, drew out a table, laid the cloth on it, and said:
"Cloth, spread yourself, and serve all up kinds of good dishes."
But never a bit of dry bread did the cloth serve up.
"Well," said the lad, "there's no help for it but to go to the North
Wind again;" and away he went.
So he came to where the North Wind lived late in the afternoon.
"Good evening!" said the lad.
"Good evening," said the North Wind.
"I want my rights for that meal of ours which you took," said the lad;
"for as for that cloth I got, it isn't worth a penny."
"I've got no meal," said the North Wind; "but yonder you have a ram
which coins nothing but golden ducats as soon as you say to it:
"'Ram, ram! make money!'"
So the lad thought this a fine thing but as it was too far to get home
that day, he turned in for the night to the same inn where he had slept
before.
Before he called for anything, he tried the truth of what the North Wind
had said of the ram, and found it all right; but when the landlord saw
that, he thought it was a famous ram, and, when the lad had fallen
asleep, he took another which couldn't coin gold ducats, and changed the
Next morning off went the lad; and when he got home to his mother he
"After all, the North Wind is a jolly fellow; for now he has given me a
ram which can coin golden ducats if I only say, 'Ram, ram! make
money!'"
"All very true, I dare say," said his mother; "but I shan't believe any
such stuff until I see the ducats made."
"Ram, ram! make money!" said the lad; but if the ram made anything it
wasn't money.
So the lad went back again to the North Wind and blew him up, and said
the ram was worth nothing, and he must have his rights for the meal.
"Well," said the North Wind; "I've nothing else to give you but that old
stick in the corner yonder; but it's a stick of that kind that if you
say:
"'Stick, stick! lay on!' it lays on till you say:
"'Stick, stick! now stop!'"
So, as the way was long, the lad turned in this night too to the
landlord; but as he could pretty well guess how things stood as to the
cloth and the ram, he lay down at once on the bench and began to snore,
as if he were asleep.
Now the landlord, who easily saw that the stick must be worth something,
hunted up one which was like it, and when he heard the lad snore, was
going to change the two, but just as the landlord was about to take it
the lad bawled out:
"Stick, stick! lay on!"
So the stick began to beat the landlord, till he jumped over chairs, and
tables, and benches, and yelled and roared:
"Oh my! oh my! bid the stick be still, else it will beat me to death,
and you shall have back both your cloth and your ram."
When the lad thought the landlord had got enough, he said:
"Stick, stick! now stop!"
Then he took the cloth and put it into his pocket, and went home with
his stick in his hand, leading the ram by a cord round its horns; and so
he got his rights for the meal he had lost.
IV
THE LAD AND THE DEIL
Once on a time there was a lad who was walking along a road cracking
nuts, so he found one that was worm-eaten, and just at that very moment
he met the Deil.
"Is it true, now," said the lad, "what they say, that the Deil can make
himself as small as he chooses, and thrust himself on through a
pinhole?"
"Yes, it is," said the Deil.
"Oh! it is, is it? then let me see you do it, and just creep into this
nut," said the lad.
So the Deil did it.
Now, when he had crept well into it through the worm's hole, the lad
stopped it up with a pin.
"Now, I've got you safe," he said, and put the nut into his pocket.
So when he had walked on a bit, he came to a smithy, and he turned in
and asked the smith if he'd be good enough to crack that nut for him.
"Ay, that'll be an easy job," said the smith, and took his smallest
hammer, laid the nut on the anvil, and gave it a blow, but it wouldn't
break.
So he took another hammer a little bigger, but that wasn't heavy enough
either.
Then he took one bigger still, but it was still the same story; and so
the smith got wroth, and grasped his great sledge-hammer.
"Now, I'll crack you to bits," he said, and let drive at the nut with
all his might and main. And so the nut flew to pieces with a bang that
blew off half the roof of the smithy, and the whole house creaked and
groaned as though it were ready to fall.
"Why! if I don't think the Deil must have been in that nut," said the
smith.
"So he was; you're quite right," said the lad, as he went away laughing.
V
ANANZI AND THE LION
Once on a time Ananzi planned a scheme. He went to town and bought ever
so many firkins of fat, and ever so many sacks, and ever so many balls
of string, and a very big frying pan, then he went to the bay and blew a
shell, and called the Head-fish in the sea, "Green Eel," to him. Then he
said to the fish, "The King sends me to tell you that you must bring all
the fish on shore, for he wants to give them new life."
So "Green Eel" said he would, and went to call them. Meanwhile Ananzi
lighted a fire, and took out some of the fat, and got his frying pan
ready, and as fast as the fish came out of the water he caught them and
put them into the frying pan, and so he did with all of them until he
got to the Head-fish, who was so slippery that he couldn't hold him, and
he got back again into the water.
When Ananzi had fried all the fish, he put them into the sacks, and
took the sacks on his back, and set off to the mountains. He had not
gone very far when he met Lion, and Lion said to him:
"Well, brother Ananzi, where have you been? I have not seen you a long
time."
Ananzi said, "I have been travelling about."
"Oh! But what have you got there?" said the Lion.
"Oh! I have got my mother's bones--she has been dead these forty-eleven
years, and they say I must not keep her here, so I am taking her up into
the middle of the mountains to bury her."
Then they parted. After he had gone a little way, the Lion said: "I know
that Ananzi is a great rogue; I dare say he has got something there that
he doesn't want me to see, and I will just follow him;" but he took care
not to let Ananzi see him.
Now, when Ananzi got into the wood, he set his sacks down, and took one
fish out and began to eat; then a fly came, and Ananzi said, "I cannot
eat any more, for there is some one near;" so he tied the sack up, and
went on farther into the mountains, where he set his sacks down, and
took out two fish which he ate; and no fly came. He said, "There is no
one near;" so he took out more fish. But when he had eaten about half a
dozen the Lion came up and said:
"Well, brother Ananzi, a pretty tale you have told me."
"Oh! brother Lion, I am so glad you have come; never mind what tale I
have told you, but come and sit down--it was only my fun."
So Lion sat down and began to eat; but before Ananzi had eaten two fish,
Lion had emptied one of the sacks. Then said Ananzi to himself:
"Greedy fellow, eating up all my fish."
"What do you say, sir?"
"I only said you do not eat half fast enough," for he was afraid the
Lion would eat him up.
Then they went on eating, but Ananzi wanted to revenge himself, and he
said to the Lion, "Which of us do you think is the stronger?"
The Lion said, "Why, I am, of course."
Then Ananzi said, "We will tie one another to the tree, and we shall see
which is the stronger."
Now they agreed that the Lion should tie Ananzi first, and he tied him
with some very fine string, and did not tie him tight. Ananzi twisted
himself about two or three times, and the string broke.
Then it was Ananzi's turn to tie the Lion, and he took some very strong
cord. The Lion said, "You must not tie me tight, for I did not tie you
tight." And Ananzi said, "Oh! no, to be sure, I will not." But he tied
him as tight as ever he could, and then told him to try and get loose.
The Lion tried and tried in vain--he could not get loose. Then Ananzi
thought, now is my chance; so he got a big stick and beat him, and then
went away and left him, for he was afraid to loose him lest he should
kill him.
Now there was a woman called Miss Nancy, who was going out one morning
to get some "callalou" (spinach) in the wood, and as she was going she
heard some one say, "Good morning, Miss Nancy!" She could not tell who
spoke to her, but she looked where the voice came from, and saw the Lion
tied to the tree.
"Good morning, Mr. Lion, what are you doing there?"
He said, "It is all that fellow Ananzi who has tied me to the tree, but
will you loose me?"
But she said, "No, for I am afraid, if I do, you will kill me." But he
gave her his word he would not; still she could not trust him; but he
begged her again and again, and said:
"Well, if I do try to eat you, I hope all the trees will cry out shame
upon me."
So at last she consented; but she had no sooner loosed him, than he came
up to her to eat her, for he had been so many days without food that he
was quite ravenous, but the trees immediately cried out, "Shame," and so
he could not eat her. Then she went away as fast as she could, and the
Lion found his way home.
When Lion got home he told his wife and children all that happened to
him, and how Miss Nancy had saved his life, so they said they would have
a great dinner, and ask Miss Nancy. Now when Ananzi heard of it, he
wanted to go to the dinner, so he went to Miss Nancy, and said she must
take him with her as her child, but she said, "No." Then he said, "I can
turn myself into quite a little child and then you can take me," and at
last she said, "Yes;" and he told her, when she was asked what pap her
baby ate, she must be sure to tell them it did not eat pap, but the same
food as every one else; and so they went, and had a very good dinner,
and set off home again--but somehow one of the Lion's sons fancied that
all was not right, and he told his father he was sure it was Ananzi, and
the Lion set out after him.
Now as they were going along, before the Lion got up to them, Ananzi
begged Miss Nancy to put him down, that he might run, which he did, and
he got away and ran along the wood, and the Lion ran after him. When he
found the Lion was overtaking him, he turned himself into an old man
with a bundle of wood on his head--and when the Lion got up to him, he
said, "Good morning, Mr. Lion," and the Lion said, "Good morning, old
gentleman."
Then the old man said, "What are you after now?" and the Lion asked if
he had seen Ananzi pass that way, but the old man said, "No, that fellow
Ananzi is always meddling with some one; what mischief has he been up to
now?"
Then the Lion told him, but the old man said it was no use to follow him
any more, for he would never catch him, and so the Lion wished him
good-day, and turned and went home again.
VI
THE GRATEFUL FOXES
One fine spring day two friends went out to a moor to gather fern,
attended by a boy with a bottle of wine and a box of provisions. As they
were straying about, they saw at the foot of a hill two foxes that had
brought out their cub to play; and whilst they looked on, struck by the
strangeness of the sight, three children came up from a neighbouring
village with baskets in their hands, on the same errand as themselves.
As soon as the children saw the foxes, they picked up a bamboo stick and
took the creatures stealthily in the rear; and when the old foxes took
to flight, they surrounded them and beat them with the stick, so that
they ran away as fast as their legs could carry them; but two of the
boys held down the cub, and, seizing it by the scruff of the neck, went
off in high glee.
The two friends were looking on all the while, and one of them, raising
his voice, shouted out, "Hallo! you boys! what are you doing with that
fox?"
The eldest of the boys replied, "We're going to take him home and sell
him to a young man in our village. He'll buy him, and then he'll boil
him in a pot and eat him."
"Well," replied the other, after considering the matter attentively, "I
suppose it's all the same to you whom you sell him to. You'd better let
me have him."
"Oh, but the young man from our village promised us a good sum if we
could find a fox, and got us to come out to the hills and catch one; and
so we can't sell him to you at any price."
"Well, I suppose it cannot be helped, then; but how much would the young
man give you for the cub?"
"Oh, he'll give us three hundred cash at least."
"Then I'll give you half a bu;and so you'll gain five hundred cash
by the transaction."
"Oh, we'll sell him for that, sir. How shall we hand him over to you?"
"Just tie him up here," said the other; and so he made fast the cub
round the neck with the string of the napkin in which the luncheon-box
was wrapped, and gave half a bu to the three boys, who ran away
delighted.
The man's friend, upon this, said to him: "Well, certainly you have got
queer tastes. What on earth are you going to keep the fox for?"
"How very unkind of you to speak of my tastes like that. If we had not
interfered just now, the fox's cub would have lost its life. If we had
not seen the affair, there would have been no help for it. How could I
stand by and see life taken? It was but a little I spent--only half a
bu--to save the cub, but had it cost a fortune I should not have grudged
it. I thought you were intimate enough with me to know my heart; but
to-day you have accused me of being eccentric, and I see how mistaken I
have been in you. However, our friendship shall cease from this day
forth."
And when he had said this with a great deal of firmness, the other,
retiring backward and bowing with his hands on his knees, replied:
"Indeed, indeed, I am filled with admiration at the goodness of your
heart. When I hear you speak thus, I feel more than ever how great is
the love I bear you. I thought that you might wish to use the cub as a
sort of decoy to lead the old ones to you, that you might pray them to
bring prosperity and virtue to your house. When I called you eccentric
just now, I was but trying your heart, because I had some suspicions of
you; and now I am truly ashamed of myself."
And as he spoke, still bowing, the other replied: "Really! was that
indeed your thought? Then I pray you to forgive me for my violent
language."
When the two friends had thus become reconciled, they examined the cub,
and saw that it had a slight wound in its foot, and could not walk; and
while they were thinking what they should do, they spied out the herb
called "Doctor's Nakasé," which was just sprouting; so they rolled up a
little of it in their fingers and applied it to the part. Then they
pulled out some boiled rice from their luncheon-box and offered it to
the cub, but it showed no sign of wanting to eat; so they stroked it
gently on the back and petted it; and as the pain of the wound seemed to
have subsided, they were admiring the properties of the herb, when,
opposite to them, they saw the old foxes sitting watching them by the
side of some stacks of rice straw.
"Look there! the old foxes have come back, out of fear for their cub's
safety. Come, we will set it free!" And with these words they untied the
string round the cub's neck, and turned its head toward the spot where
the old foxes sat; and as the wounded foot was no longer painful, with
one bound it dashed to its parents' side and licked them all over for
joy, while they seemed to bow their thanks, looking toward the two
friends. So, with peace in their hearts, the latter went off to another
place, and, choosing a pretty spot, produced the wine bottle and ate
their noonday meal; and after a pleasant day, they returned to their
homes, and became firmer friends than ever.
Now the man who had rescued the fox's cub was a tradesman in good
circumstances: he had three or four agents and two maid-servants,
besides men-servants; and altogether he lived in a liberal manner. He
was married, and this union had brought him one son, who had reached his
tenth year, but had been attacked by a strange disease which defied all
the physicians' skill and drugs. At last a famous physician prescribed
the liver taken from a live fox, which, as he said, would certainly
effect a cure. If that were not forthcoming, the most expensive medicine
in the world would not restore the boy to health. When the parents heard
this, they were at their wits' end. However, they told the state of the
case to a man who lived on the mountains. "Even though our child should
die for it," they said, "we will not ourselves deprive other creatures
of their lives; but you, who live among the hills, are sure to hear when
your neighbours go out fox-hunting. We don't care what price we might
have to pay for a fox's liver; pray, buy one for us at any expense." So
they pressed him to exert himself on their behalf; and he, having
promised faithfully to execute the commission, went his way.
In the night of the following day there came a messenger, who announced
himself as coming from the person who had undertaken to procure the
fox's liver; so the master of the house went out to see him.
"I have come from Mr. So-and-so. Last night the fox's liver that you
required fell into his hands; so he sent me to bring it to you." With
these words the messenger produced a small jar, adding, "In a few days
he will let you know the price."
When he had delivered his message, the master of the house was greatly
pleased and said, "Indeed, I am deeply grateful for this kindness, which
will save my son's life."
Then the good wife came out, and received the jar with every mark of
politeness.
"We must make a present to the messenger."
"Indeed, sir, I've already been paid for my trouble."
"Well, at any rate, you must stop the night here."
"Thank you, sir: I've a relation in the next village whom I have not
seen for a long while, and I will pass the night with him;" and so he
took his leave, and went away.
The parents lost no time in sending to let the physician know that they
had procured the fox's liver. The next day the doctor came and
compounded a medicine for the patient, which at once produced a good
effect, and there was no little joy in the household. As luck would have
it, three days after this the man whom they had commissioned to buy the
fox's liver came to the house: so the goodwife hurried out to meet him
and welcome him.
"How quickly you fulfilled our wishes, and how kind of you to send at
once! The doctor prepared the medicine, and now our boy can get up and
walk about the room; and it's all owing to your goodness."
"Wait a bit!" cried the guest, who did not know what to make of the joy
of the two parents. "The commission with which you entrusted me about
the fox's liver turned out to be a matter of impossibility, so I came
to-day to make my excuses; and now I really can't understand what you
are so grateful to me for."
"We are thanking you, sir," replied the master of the house, bowing with
his hands on the ground, "for the fox's liver which we asked you to
procure for us."
"I really am perfectly unaware of having sent you a fox's liver: there
must be some mistake here. Pray inquire carefully into the matter."
"Well, this is very strange. Four nights ago, a man of some five or six
and thirty years of age came with a verbal message from you, to the
effect that you had sent him with a fox's liver, which you had just
procured, and said that he would come and tell us the price another day.
When we asked him to spend the night here, he answered that he would
lodge with a relation in the next village, and went away."
The visitor was more and more lost in amazement, and, leaning his head
on one side in deep thought, confessed that he could make nothing of it.
As for the husband and wife, they felt quite out of countenance at
having thanked a man so warmly for favours of which he denied all
knowledge; and so the visitor took his leave and went home.
That night there appeared at the pillow of the master of the house a
woman of about one or two and thirty years of age, who said: "I am the
fox that lives at such-and-such a mountain. Last spring, when I was
taking out my cub to play, it was carried off by some boys, and only
saved by your goodness. The desire to requite this kindness pierced me
to the quick. At last, when calamity attacked your house, I thought I
might be of use to you. Your son's illness could not be cured without a
liver taken from a live fox, so to repay your kindness I killed my cub
and took out its liver; then its sire, disguising himself as a
messenger, brought it to your house."
And as she spoke, the fox shed tears; and the master of the house,
wishing to thank her, moved in bed, upon which his wife awoke and asked
him what was the matter; but he too, to her great astonishment, was
biting the pillow and weeping bitterly.
"Why are you weeping thus?" asked she.
At last he sat up in bed and said: "Last spring, when I was out on a
pleasure excursion, I was the means of saving the life of a fox's cub,
as I told you at the time. The other day I told Mr. So-and-so that,
although my son were to die before my eyes, I would not be the means of
killing a fox on purpose, but asked him, in case he heard of any hunter
killing a fox, to buy it for me. How the foxes came to hear of this I
don't know; but the foxes to whom I had shown kindness killed their own
cub and took out the liver; and the old dog-fox, disguising himself as a
messenger from the person to whom we had confided the commission, came
here with it. His mate has just been at my pillow-side and told me all
about it. Hence it was that, in spite of myself, I was moved to tears."
When she heard this, the goodwife likewise was blinded by her tears, and
for a while they lay lost in thought; but at last, coming to themselves,
they lighted the lamp on the shelf on which the family idol stood, and
spent the night in reciting prayers and praises, and the next day they
published the matter to the household and to their relations and
friends. Now, although there are instances of men killing their own
children to requite a favour, there is no other example of foxes having
done such a thing; so the story became the talk of the whole country.
Now, the boy who had recovered through the efficacy of this medicine
selected the prettiest spot on the premises to erect a shrine to Inari
Sama,the Fox God, and offered sacrifice to the two old foxes, for
whom he purchased the highest rank at the court of the Mikado.
The passage in the tale which speaks of rank being purchased for the
foxes at the court of the Mikado is, of course, a piece of nonsense.
"The saints who are worshipped in Japan," writes a native authority,
"are men who, in the remote ages, when the country was developing
itself, were sages, and by their great and virtuous deeds having earned
the gratitude of future generations, received divine honours after their
death. How can the Son of Heaven, who is the father and mother of his
people, turn dealer in ranks and honours? If rank were a matter of
barter, it would cease to be a reward to the virtuous."
All matters connected with the shrines of the Shintô, or indigenous
religion, are confided to the superintendence of the families of Yoshida
and Fushimi, Kugés or nobles of the Mikado's court at Kiyôto. The
affairs of the Buddhist or imported religion are under the care of the
family of Kanjuji. As it is necessary that those who as priests perform
the honourable office of serving the gods should be persons of some
standing, a certain small rank is procured for them through the
intervention of the representatives of the above noble families, who, on
the issuing of the required patent, receive as their perquisite a fee,
which, although insignificant in itself, is yet of importance to the
poor Kugés, whose penniless condition forms a great contrast to the
wealth of their inferiors in rank, the Daimios. I believe that this is
the only case in which rank can be bought or sold in Japan. In China, on
the contrary, in spite of what has been written by Meadows and other
admirers of the examination system, a man can be what he pleases by
paying for it; and the coveted button, which is nominally the reward of
learning and ability, is more often the prize of wealthy ignorance.
The saints who are alluded to above are the saints of the whole country,
as distinct from those who for special deeds are locally worshipped.
Touching the remedy of the fox's liver, prescribed in the tale, I may
add that there would be nothing strange in this to a person acquainted
with the Chinese pharmacopoeia, which the Japanese long exclusively
followed, although they are now successfully studying the art of healing
as practised in the West. When I was at Peking, I saw a Chinese
physician prescribe a decoction of three scorpions for a child struck
down with fever; and on another occasion a groom of mine, suffering from
dysentery, was treated with acupuncture of the tongue. The art of
medicine would appear to be at the present time in China much in the
state in which it existed in Europe in the sixteenth century, when the
excretions and secretions of all manner of animals, saurians, and
venomous snakes and insects, and even live bugs, were administered to
patients. "Some physicians," says Matthiolus, "use the ashes of
scorpions, burnt alive, for retention caused by either renal or vesical
calculi. But I have myself thoroughly experienced the utility of an oil
I make myself, whereof scorpions form a very large portion of the
ingredients. If only the region of the heart and all the pulses of the
body be anointed with it, it will free the patients from the effects of
all kinds of poisons taken by the mouth, corrosive ones excepted."
Decoctions of Egyptian mummies were much commended, and often prescribed
with due academical solemnity; and the bones of the human skull,
pulverized and administered with oil, were used as a specific in cases
of renal calculus. (See Petri Andreæ Matthioli "Opera," 1574.)
These remarks were made to me by a medical gentleman to whom I mentioned
the Chinese doctor's prescription of scorpion tea, and they seem to me
so curious that I insert them for comparison's sake.
FOOTNOTES:
[Footnote 1: Bu. This coin is generally called by foreigners "ichibu,"
which means "one bu." To talk of "a hundred ichibus" is as though a
Japanese were to say "a hundred one shillings." Four bus make a
riyo, or ounce; and any sum above three bus is spoken of as so many
riyos and bus--as 101 riyos and three bus equal 407 bus. The bu is worth
about 1s. 4d.]
[Footnote 2: Inari Sama is the title under which was deified a certain
mythical personage, called Uga, to whom tradition attributes the honour
of having first discovered and cultivated the rice-plant. He is
represented carrying a few ears of rice, and is symbolized by a snake
guarding a bale of rice grain. The foxes wait upon him, and do his
bidding. Inasmuch as rice is the most important and necessary product of
Japan, the honours which Inari Sama receives are extraordinary. Almost
every house in the country contains somewhere about the grounds a pretty
little shrine in his honour; and on a certain day of the second month of
the year his feast is celebrated with much beating of drums and other
noises, in which the children take a special delight. "On this day,"
says the O-Satsuyô, a Japanese cyclopædia, "at Yeddo, where there are
myriads upon myriads of shrines to Inari Sama, there are all sorts of
ceremonies. Long banners with inscriptions are erected, lamps and
lanterns are hung up, and the houses are decked with various dolls and
figures; the sound of flutes and drums is heard, and people dance and
make holiday according to their fancy. In short, it is the most bustling
festival of the Yeddo year."]
VII
THE BADGER'S MONEY
It is a common saying among men that to forget favours received is the
part of a bird or a beast: an ungrateful man will be ill spoken of by
all the world. And yet even birds and beasts will show gratitude; so
that a man who does not requite a favour is worse even than dumb brutes.
Is not this a disgrace?
Once upon a time, in a hut at a place called Namékata, in Hitachi, there
lived an old priest famous neither for learning nor wisdom, but bent
only on passing his days in prayer and meditation. He had not even a
child to wait upon him, but prepared his food with his own hands. Night
and morning he recited the prayer "Namu Amida Butsu,"intent upon
that alone. Although the fame of his virtue did not reach far, yet his
neighbours respected and revered him, and often brought him food and
raiment; and when his roof or his walls fell out of repair, they would
mend them for him; so for the things of this world he took no thought.
One very cold night, when he little thought any one was outside, he
heard a voice calling, "Your reverence! your reverence!" So he rose and
went out to see who it was, and there he beheld an old badger standing.
Any ordinary man would have been greatly alarmed at the apparition; but
the priest, being such as he has been described above, showed no sign of
fear, but asked the creature its business. Upon this the badger
respectfully bent its knees and said:
"Hitherto, sir, my lair has been in the mountains, and of snow or frost
I have taken no heed; but now I am growing old, and this severe cold is
more than I can bear. I pray you to let me enter and warm myself at the
fire of your cottage, that I may live through this bitter night."
When the priest heard what a helpless state the beast was reduced to, he
was filled with pity and said:
"That's a very slight matter: make haste and come in and warm yourself."
The badger, delighted with so good a reception, went into the hut, and
squatting down by the fire began to warm itself; and the priest, with
renewed fervour, recited his prayers and struck his bell before the
image of Buddha, looking straight before him.
After two hours the badger took its leave, with profuse expressions of
thanks, and went out; and from that time forth it came every night to
the hut. As the badger would collect and bring with it dried branches
and dead leaves from the hills for firewood, the priest at last became
very friendly with it, and got used to its company; so that if ever, as
the night wore on, the badger did not arrive, he used to miss it, and
wonder why it did not come. When the winter was over, and the springtime
came at the end of the second month, the badger gave up its visits, and
was no more seen; but, on the return of the winter, the beast resumed
its old habit of coming to the hut. When this practice had gone on for
ten years, one day the badger said to the priest, "Through your
reverence's kindness for all these years, I have been able to pass the
winter nights in comfort. Your favours are such that during all my life,
and even after my death, I must remember them. What can I do to requite
them? If there is anything that you wish for, pray tell me."
The priest, smiling at this speech, answered: "Being such as I am, I
have no desire and no wishes. Glad as I am to hear your kind intentions,
there is nothing that I can ask you to do for me. You need feel no
anxiety on my account. As long as I live, when the winter comes, you
shall be welcome here." The badger, on hearing this, could not conceal
its admiration of the depth of the old man's benevolence; but having so
much to be grateful for, it felt hurt at not being able to requite it.
As this subject was often renewed between them, the priest at last,
touched by the goodness of the badger's heart, said: "Since I have
shaven my head, renounced the world, and forsaken the pleasures of this
life, I have no desire to gratify, yet I own I should like to possess
three riyos in gold. Food and raiment I receive by the favour of the
villagers, so I take no heed for those things. Were I to die to-morrow,
and attain my wish of being born again into the next world, the same
kind folk have promised to meet and bury my body. Thus, although I have
no other reason to wish for money, still if I had three riyos I would
offer them up at some holy shrine, that masses and prayers might be said
for me, whereby I might enter into salvation. Yet I would not get this
money by violent or unlawful means; I only think of what might be if I
had it. So you see, since you have expressed such kind feelings toward
me, I have told you what is on my mind." When the priest had done
speaking, the badger leant its head on one side with a puzzled and
anxious look, so much so that the old man was sorry he had expressed a
wish which seemed to give the beast trouble, and tried to retract what
he had said. "Posthumous honours, after all, are the wish of ordinary
men. I, who am a priest, ought not to entertain such thoughts, or to
want money; so pray pay no attention to what I have said;" and the
badger, feigning assent to what the priest had impressed upon it,
returned to the hills as usual.
From that time forth the badger came no more to the hut. The priest
thought this very strange, but imagined either that the badger stayed
away because it did not like to come without the money, or that it had
been killed in an attempt to steal it; and he blamed himself for having
added to his sins for no purpose, repenting when it was too late:
persuaded, however, that the badger must have been killed, he passed his
time in putting up prayers upon prayers for it.
After three years had gone by, one night the old man heard a voice near
his door calling out, "Your reverence! your reverence!"
As the voice was like that of the badger, he jumped up as soon as he
heard it, and ran to open the door; and there, sure enough, was the
badger. The priest, in great delight, cried out: "And so you are safe
and sound, after all! Why have you been so long without coming here? I
have been expecting you anxiously this long while."
So the badger came into the hut and said: "If the money which you
required had been for unlawful purposes, I could easily have procured as
much as ever you might have wanted; but when I heard that it was to be
offered to a temple for masses for your soul, I thought that, if I were
to steal the hidden treasure of some other man, you could not apply to a
sacred purpose money which had been obtained at the expense of his
sorrow. So I went to the island of Sado,and gathering the sand and
earth which had been cast away as worthless by the miners, fused it
afresh in the fire; and at this work I spent months and days." As the
badger finished speaking, the priest looked at the money which it had
produced, and sure enough he saw that it was bright and new and clean;
so he took the money, and received it respectfully, raising it to his
"And so you have had all this toil and labour on account of a foolish
speech of mine? I have obtained my heart's desire, and am truly
thankful."
As he was thanking the badger with great politeness and ceremony, the
beast said: "In doing this I have but fulfilled my own wish; still I
hope that you will tell this thing to no man."
"Indeed," replied the priest, "I cannot choose but tell this story. For
if I keep this money in my poor hut, it will be stolen by thieves: I
must either give it to some one to keep for me, or else at once offer it
up at the temple. And when I do this, when people see a poor old priest
with a sum of money quite unsuited to his station, they will think it
very suspicious, and I shall have to tell the tale as it occurred; but I
shall say that the badger that gave me the money has ceased coming to my
hut, you need not fear being waylaid, but can come, as of old, and
shelter yourself from the cold." To this the badger nodded assent; and
as long as the old priest lived, it came and spent the winter nights
with him.
From this story, it is plain that even beasts have a sense of gratitude:
in this quality dogs excel all other beasts. Is not the story of the dog
of Totoribé Yorodzu written in the Annals of Japan? Ihave heard that
many anecdotes of this nature have been collected and printed in a book,
which I have not yet seen; but as the facts which I have recorded relate
to a badger, they appear to me to be passing strange.
[Footnote 3: A Buddhist prayer, in which something approaching to the
sounds of the original Sanscrit has been preserved. The meaning of the
prayer is explained as, "Save us, eternal Buddha'" Many even of the
priests who repeat it know it only as a formula, without understanding
it.]
[Footnote 4: An island on the west coast of Japan, famous for its gold
mines.]
[Footnote 5: The author of the tale.]
VIII
WHY BROTHER BEAR HAS NO TAIL
"I 'clar' ter gracious, honey," Uncle Remus exclaimed one night, as the
little boy ran in, "you sholy ain't chaw'd yo' vittles. Hit ain't bin no
time, skacely, sence de supper-bell rung, en ef you go on dis a-way,
you'll des nat'ally pe'sh yo'se'f out."
"Oh, I wasn't hungry," said the little boy. "I had something before
supper, and I wasn't hungry anyway."
The old man looked keenly at the child, and presently he said:
"De ins en de outs er dat kinder talk all come ter de same p'int in my
min'. Youer bin a-cuttin' up at de table, en Mars John, he tuck'n sont
you 'way fum dar, en w'iles he think youer off some'er a-snifflin' en
a-feelin' bad, yer you is a-high-primin' 'roun' des lak you done had mo'
supper dan de King er Philanders."
Before the little boy could inquire about the King of Philanders he
heard his father calling him. He started to go out, but Uncle Remus
motioned him back.
"Des set right whar you is, honey--des set right still."
Then Uncle Remus went to the door and answered for the child; and a very
queer answer it was--one that could be heard half over the plantation:
"Mars John, I wish you en Miss Sally be so good ez ter let dat chile
'lone. He down yer cryin' he eyes out, en he ain't boddern' 'long er
nobody in de roun' worl'."
Uncle Remus stood in the door a moment to see what the reply would be,
but he heard none. Thereupon he continued, in the same loud tone:
"I ain't bin use ter no sich gwines on in Ole Miss time, en I ain't
gwine git use ter it now. Dat I ain't."
Presently 'Tildy, the house-girl, brought the little boy his supper, and
the girl was no sooner out of hearing than the child swapped it with
Uncle Remus for a roasted yam, and the enjoyment of both seemed to be
complete.
"Uncle Remus," said the little boy, after a while, "you know I wasn't
crying just now."
"Dat's so, honey," the old man replied, "but 't wouldn't er bin long
'fo' you would er bin, kaze Mars John bawl out lak a man wa't got a
strop in he han', so wa't de diff'unce?"
When they had finished eating, Uncle Remus busied himself in cutting and
trimming some sole-leather for future use. His knife was so keen, and
the leather fell away from it so smoothly and easily, that the little
boy wanted to trim some himself. But to this Uncle Remus would not
listen.
"'Tain't on'y chilluns w'at got de consate er doin' eve'ything dey see
yuther folks do. Hit's grown folks w'at oughter know better," said the
old man. "Dat's des de way Brer B'ar git his tail broke off
smick-smack-smoove, en down ter dis day he be funnies'-lookin' creetur
w'at wobble on top er dry groun'."
Instantly the little boy forgot all about Uncle Remus's sharp knife.
"Hit seem lak dat in dem days Brer Rabbit en Brer Tarrypin done gone in
cohoots fer ter outdo de t'er creeturs. One time Brer Rabbit tuck'n make
a call on Brer Tarrypin, but w'en he git ter Brer Tarrypin house, he
year talk fum Miss Tarrypin dat her ole man done gone fer ter spen' de
day wid Mr. Mud-Turkle, w'ich dey wuz blood kin. Brer Rabbit he put out
atter Brer Tarrypin, en w'en he got ter Mr. Mud-Turkle house, dey all
sot up, dey did, en tole tales, en den w'en twelf er' clock come dey had
crawfish fer dinner, en dey 'joy deyse'f right erlong. Atter dinner dey
went down ter Mr. Mud-Turkle mill-pon,' en w'en dey git dar Mr.
Mud-Turkle en Brer Tarrypin dey 'muse deyse'f, dey did, wid slidin' fum
de top uv a big slantin' rock down inter de water.
"I'speck you moughter seen rocks in de water 'fo' now, whar dey git
green en slipp'y," said Uncle Remus.
The little boy had not only seen them, but had found them to be very
dangerous to walk upon, and the old man continued:
"Well, den, dish yer rock wuz mighty slick en mighty slantin'. Mr.
Mud-Turkle, he'd crawl ter de top, en tu'n loose, en go a-sailin' down
inter de water--kersplash! Ole Brer Tarrypin, he'd foller atter, en
slide down inter de water--kersplash! Ole Brer Rabbit, he sot off, he
did, en praise um up.
"W'iles dey wuz a-gwine on dis a-way, a-havin' der fun, en 'joyin'
deyse'f, yer come ole Brer B'ar. He year um laffin' en holl'in', en he
hail um.
"'Heyo, folks! W'at all dis? Ef my eye ain't 'ceive me, dish yer's Brer
Rabbit, en Brer Tarrypin, en ole Unk' Tommy Mud-Turkle,' sez Brer B'ar,
sezee.
"'De same,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'en yer we is 'joyin' de day dat
passes des lak dey wa'n't no hard times.'
"'Well, well, well!' sez ole Brer B'ar, sezee, 'a-slippin' en a-slidin'
en makin' free! En w'at de matter wid Brer Rabbit dat he ain't j'inin'
in?' sezee.
"Ole Brer Rabbit he wink at Brer Tarrypin, en Brer Tarrypin he hunch Mr.
Mud-Turkle, en den Brer Rabbit he up'n 'low, he did:
"'My goodness, Brer B'ar! you can't 'speck a man fer ter slip en slide
de whole blessid day, kin you? I done had my fun, en now I'm a-settin'
out yer lettin' my cloze dry. Hit's tu'n en tu'n about wid me en deze
gents w'en dey's any fun gwine on,' sezee.
"'Maybe Brer B'ar might jine in wid us,' sez Brer Tarrypin, sezee.
"Brer Rabbit he des holler en laff.
"'Shoo!' sezee, 'Brer B'ar foot too big en he tail too long fer ter
slide down dat rock,' sezee.
"Dis kinder put Brer B'ar on he mettle, en he up'n 'spon', he did:
"'Maybe dey is, en maybe dey ain't, yit I ain't a-feared ter try.'
"Wid dat de yuthers tuck'n made way fer 'im, en ole Brer B'ar he git up
on de rock he did, en squot down on he hunkers, en quile he tail und'
'im, en start down. Fus' he go sorter slow, en he grin lak he feel good;
den he go sorter peart, en he grin lak he feel bad; den he go mo'
pearter, en he grin lak he skeerd; den he strack de slick part, en,
gentermens! he swaller de grin en fetch a howl dat moughter bin yeard a
mile, en he hit de water lak a chimbly a-fallin'.
"You kin gimme denial," Uncle Remus continued after a little pause, "but
des ez sho' ez you er settin' dar, w'en Brer B'ar slick'd up en flew
down dat rock, he break off he tail right smick-smack-smoove, en mo'n
dat, w'en he make his disappear'nce up de big road, Brer Rabbit holler
out:
"'Brer B'ar!--O Brer B'ar! I year tell dat flaxseed poultices is mighty
good fer so' places!'
"Yit Brer B'ar ain't look back."
IX
THE ORIGIN OF RUBIES
There was a certain king who died leaving four sons behind him with his
queen. The queen was passionately fond of the youngest of the princes.
She gave him the best robes, the best horses, the best food, and the
best furniture. The other three princes became exceedingly jealous of
their youngest brother, and, conspiring against him and their mother,
made them live in a separate house, and took possession of the estate.
Owing to overindulgence, the youngest prince had become very wilful. He
never listened to any one, not even to his mother, but had his own way
in everything. One day he went with his mother to bathe in the river. A
large boat was riding there at anchor. None of the boatmen were in it.
The prince went into the boat, and told his mother to come into it. His
mother besought him to get down from the boat, as it did not belong to
him. But the prince said, "No, mother I am not coming down; I mean to go
on a voyage, and if you wish to come with me, then delay not but come up
at once, or I shall be off in a trice." The queen besought the prince to
do no such thing, but to come down instantly. But the prince gave no
heed to what she said, and began to take up the anchor. The queen went
up into the boat in great haste; and the moment she was on board the
boat started, and falling into the current passed on swiftly like an
arrow. The boat went on and on till it reached the sea. After it had
gone many furlongs into the open sea, the boat came near a whirlpool
where the prince saw a great many rubies of monstrous size floating on
the waters. Such large rubies no one had ever seen, each being in value
equal to the wealth of seven kings. The prince caught hold of
half-a-dozen of those rubies, and put them on board. His mother said,
"Darling, don't take up those red balls; they must belong to somebody
who has been shipwrecked, and we may be taken up as thieves." At the
repeated entreaties of his mother, the prince threw them into the sea,
keeping only one tied up in his clothes. The boat then drifted toward
the coast, and the queen and the prince arrived at a certain port where
they landed.
The port where they landed was not a small place; it was a large city,
the capital of a great king. Not far from the palace, the queen and her
son hired a hut where they lived. As the prince was yet a boy, he was
fond of playing at marbles. When the children of the king came out to
play on a lawn before the palace, our young prince joined them. He had
no marbles, but he played with the ruby which he had in his possession.
The ruby was so hard that it broke every taw against which it struck.
The daughter of the king, who used to watch the games from a balcony of
the palace, was astonished to see a brilliant red ball in the hand of
the strange lad, and wanted to take possession of it. She told her
father that a boy of the street had an uncommonly bright stone in his
possession which she must have or else she would starve herself to
death. The king ordered his servants to bring to him the lad with that
precious stone. When the boy was brought, the king wondered at the
largeness and brilliancy of the ruby. He had never seen anything like
it. He doubted whether any king of any country in the world possessed so
great a treasure. He asked the lad where he had got it. The lad replied
that he got it from the sea. The king offered a thousand rupees for the
ruby, and the lad, not knowing its value, readily parted with it for
that sum. He went with the money to his mother, who was not a little
frightened, thinking that her son had stolen the money from some rich
man's house. She became quiet, however, on being assured that the money
was given to him by the king in exchange for the red ball which he had
picked up in the sea.
The king's daughter, on getting the ruby put it in her hair, and,
standing before her pet parrot, said to the bird, "Oh, my darling
parrot, don't I look very beautiful with this ruby in my hair?" The
parrot replied, "Beautiful! you look quite hideous with it! What
princess ever puts only one ruby in her hair? It would be somewhat
feasible if you had two at least." Stung with shame at the reproach cast
in her teeth by the parrot, the princess went into the grief-chamber of
the palace, and would neither eat nor drink. The king was not a little
concerned when he heard that his daughter had gone into the
grief-chamber. He went to her, and asked her the cause of her grief. The
princess told the king what her pet parrot had said, and added, "Father,
if you do not procure for me another ruby like this, I'll put an end to
my life by mine own hands." The king was overwhelmed with grief. Where
was he to get another ruby like it? He doubted whether another like it
could be found in the whole world. He ordered the lad who had sold the
ruby, to be brought into his presence. "Have you, young man," asked the
king, "another ruby like the one you sold me?" The lad replied: "No, I
have not got one. Why, do you want another? I can give you lots, if you
wish to have them. They are to be found in a whirlpool in the sea, far,
far away. I can go and fetch some for you." Amazed at the lad's reply,
the king offered rich rewards for procuring only another ruby of the
same sort.
The lad went home and said to his mother that he must go to sea again to
fetch some rubies for the king. The woman was quite frightened at the
idea, and begged him not to go. But the lad was resolved on going, and
nothing could prevent him from carrying out his purpose. He accordingly
went alone on board that same vessel which had brought him and his
mother, and set sail. He reached the whirlpool, from near which he had
formerly picked up the rubies. This time, however, he determined to go
to the exact spot whence the rubies were coming out. He went to the
centre of the whirlpool, where he saw a gap reaching to the bottom of
the ocean. He dived into it, leaving his boat to wheel round the
whirlpool. When he reached the bottom of the ocean he saw there a
beautiful palace. He went inside. In the central room of the palace
there was the god Siva, with his eyes closed, and absorbed apparently in
intense meditation. A few feet above Siva's head was a platform, on
which lay a young lady of exquisite beauty. The prince went to the
platform and saw that the head of the lady was separated from her body.
Horrified at the sight, he did not know what to make of it. He saw a
stream of blood trickling from the severed head, falling upon the matted
head of Siva, and running into the ocean in the form of rubies. After a
little two small rods, one of silver and one of gold, which were lying
near the head of the lady, attracted his eyes. As he took up the rods in
his hands, the golden rod accidentally fell upon the head, on which the
head immediately joined itself to the body, and the lady got up.
Astonished at the sight of a human being, the lady asked the prince who
he was and how he had got there. After hearing the story of the prince's
adventures, the lady said, "Unhappy young man, depart instantly from
this place; for when Siva finishes his meditations he will turn you to
ashes by a single glance of his eyes." The young man, however, would not
go except in her company, as he was over head and ears in love with the
beautiful lady. At last they both contrived to run away from the palace,
and coming up to the surface of the ocean they climbed into the boat
near the centre of the whirlpool, and sailed away toward land, having
previously laden the vessel with a cargo of rubies. The wonder of the
prince's mother at seeing the beautiful damsel may be well imagined.
Early next morning the prince sent a basin full of big rubies, through a
servant. The king was astonished beyond measure. His daughter, on
getting the rubies, resolved on marrying the wonderful lad who had made
a present of them to her. Though the prince had a wife, whom he had
brought up from the depths of the ocean, he consented to have a second
wife. They were accordingly married, and lived happily for years,
begetting sons and daughters.
    Here my story endeth,
    The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc.
X
LONG, BROAD, AND SHARPSIGHT
There was a king, who was already old, and had but one son. Once upon a
time he called this son to him and said to him: "My dear son! you know
that old fruit falls to make room for other fruit. My head is already
ripening, and maybe the sun will soon no longer shine upon it; but
before you bury me, I should like to see your wife, my future daughter.
My son, marry!" The prince said: "I would gladly, father, do as you
wish; but I have no bride, and don't know any." The old king put his
hand into his pocket, took out a golden key and showed it to his son,
with the words, "go up into the tower, to the top story, look round
there, and then tell me which you fancy." The prince went without delay.
Nobody within the memory of man had been up there or had ever heard what
was up there.
When he got up to the last story, he saw in the ceiling a little iron
door like a trap-door. It was closed. He opened it with the golden key,
lifted it, and went up above it. There was a large circular room. The
ceiling was blue like the sky on a clear night, and silver stars
glittered on it, the floor was a carpet of green silk, and around in the
wall were twelve high windows in golden frames, and in each window on
crystal glass was a damsel painted with the colours of the rainbow, with
a royal crown on her head, in each window a different one in a different
dress, each handsomer than the other, and it was a wonder that the
prince did not let his eyes dwell upon them. When he had gazed at them
with astonishment, the damsels began to move as if they were alive,
looked down upon him, smiled, and did everything but speak.
Now the prince observed that one of the twelve windows was covered with
a white curtain; he drew the curtain to see what was behind it. There
there was a damsel in a white dress, girt with a silver girdle, with a
crown of pearls on her head; she was the most beautiful of all, but was
sad and pale, as if she had risen from the grave. The prince stood long
before the picture, as if he had made a discovery, and as he thus
gazed, his heart pained him, and he cried, "This one will I have, and no
other." As he said the words the damsel bowed her head, blushed like a
rose, and that instant all the pictures disappeared.
When he went down and related to his father what he had seen and which
damsel he had selected, the old king became sad, bethought himself, and
said: "You have done ill, my son, in uncovering what was curtained over,
and have placed yourself in great danger on account of those words. That
damsel is in the power of a wicked wizard, and kept captive in an iron
castle; of all who have attempted to set her free, not one has hitherto
returned. But what's done cannot be undone; the plighted word is a law.
Go! try your luck, and return home safe and sound!"
The prince took leave of his father, mounted his horse, and rode away in
search of his bride. It came to pass that he rode through a vast forest,
and through the forest he rode on and on till he lost the road. And as
he was wandering with his horse in thickets and amongst rocks and
morasses, not knowing which way to turn, he heard somebody shout behind
him, "Hi! stop!" The prince looked round, and saw a tall man hastening
after him. "Stop and take me with you, and take me into your service,
and you won't regret it!" "Who are you," said the prince, "and what can
you do?" "My name is Long, and I can extend myself. Do you see a bird's
nest in that pine yonder? I will bring you the nest down without having
to climb up."
Long then began to extend himself; his body grew rapidly till it was as
tall as the pine; he then reached the nest, and in a moment contracted
himself again and gave it to the prince. "You know your business well,
but what's the use of birds' nests to me, if you can't conduct me out of
this forest?"
"Ahem! that's an easy matter," said Long, and began to extend himself
till he was thrice as high as the highest fir in the forest, looked
round, and said: "Here on this side we have the nearest way out of the
forest." He then contracted himself, took the horse by the bridle, and
before the prince had any idea of it, they were beyond the forest.
Before them was a long and wide plain, and beyond the plain tall gray
rocks like the walls of a large town, and mountains overgrown with
forest trees.
"Yonder, sir, goes my comrade!" said Long, and pointed suddenly to the
plain; "you should take him also into your service; I believe he would
serve you well." "Shout to him, and call him hither, that I may see what
he is good for." "It is a little too far, sir," said Long; "he would
hardly hear me, and it would take a long time before he came, because he
has a great deal to carry. I'll jump after him instead." Then Long again
extended himself to such a height that his head plunged into the clouds,
made two or three steps, took his comrade by the arm, and placed him
before the prince. He was a short, thick-set fellow, with a paunch like
a sixty-four-gallon cask. "Who are you?" demanded the prince, "and what
can you do?" "My name, sir, is Broad; I can widen myself." "Give me a
specimen." "Ride quick, sir, quick, back into the forest!" cried Broad,
as he began to blow himself out.
The prince didn't understand why he was to ride away; but seeing that
Long made all haste to get into the forest, he spurred his horse and
rode full gallop after him. It was high time that he did ride away, or
else Broad would have squashed him, horse and all, as his paunch rapidly
grew in all directions; it filled everything everywhere, just as if a
mountain had rolled up. Broad then ceased to blow himself out, and took
himself in again, raising such a wind that the trees in the forest bowed
and bent, and became what he was at first. "You have played me a nice
trick," said the prince, "but I shan't find such a fellow every day;
come with me."
They proceeded further. When they approached the rocks, they met a man
who had his eyes bandaged with a handkerchief. "Sir, this is our third
comrade," said Long, "you ought to take him also into your service. I'm
sure he won't eat his victuals for naught."
"Who are you?" the prince asked him, "and why are your eyes bandaged?
You don't see your way!" "No, sir, quite the contrary! It is just
because I see too well that I am obliged to bandage my eyes; I see with
bandaged eyes just as well as others with unbandaged eyes; and if I
unbandage them I look everything through and through, and when I gaze
sharply at anything it catches fire and bursts into flame, and what
can't burn splits into pieces. For this reason my name is Sharpsight."
He then turned to a rock opposite, removed the bandage, and fixed his
flaming eyes upon it; the rock began to crackle, pieces flew on every
side, and in a very short time nothing of it remained but a heap of
sand, on which something glittered like fire. Sharpsight went to fetch
it, and brought it to the prince. It was pure gold.
"Heigho! you're a fellow that money can't purchase!" said the prince.
"He is a fool who wouldn't make use of your services, and if you have
such good sight, look and tell me whether it is far to the iron castle,
and what is now going on there?" "If you rode by yourself, sir,"
answered Sharpsight, "maybe you wouldn't get there within a year; but
with us you'll arrive to-day--they're just getting supper ready for us."
"And what is my bride doing?"
    "An iron lattice is before her,
       In a tower that's high
       She doth sit and sigh,
     A wizard watch and ward keeps o'er her."
The prince cried, "Whoever is well disposed, help me to set her free!"
They all promised to help him. They guided him among the gray rocks
through the breach that Sharpsight had made in them with his eyes, and
farther and farther on through rocks, through high mountains and deep
forests, and wherever there was any obstacle in the road, forthwith it
was removed by the three comrades. And when the sun was declining toward
the west, the mountains began to become lower, the forests less dense,
and the rocks concealed themselves amongst the heath; and when it was
almost on the point of setting, the prince saw not far before him an
iron castle; and when it was actually setting, he rode by an iron bridge
to the gate, and as soon as it had set, up rose the iron bridge of
itself, the gate closed with a single movement, and the prince and his
companions were captives in the iron castle.
When they had looked round the court, the prince put his horse up in the
stable, where everything was ready for it, and then they went into the
castle. In the court, in the stable, in the castle hall, and in the
rooms, they saw in the twilight many richly-dressed people, gentlemen
and servants, but not one of them stirred--they were all turned to
stone. They went through several rooms, and came into the supper-room.
This was brilliantly lighted up, and in the midst was a table, and on it
plenty of good meats and drinks, and covers were laid for four persons.
They waited and waited, thinking that some one would come: but when
nobody came for a long time, they sat down and ate and drank what the
palate fancied.
When they had done eating, they looked about to find where to sleep.
Thereupon the door flew open unexpectedly all at once, and into the room
came the wizard; a bent old man in a long black garb, with a bald head,
a gray beard down to his knees, and three iron hoops instead of a
girdle. By the hand he led a beautiful, very beautiful damsel, dressed
in white; she had a silver girdle round her waist, and a crown of pearls
on her head, but was pale and sad, as if she had risen from the grave.
The prince recognized her at once, sprang forward, and went to meet her;
but before he could utter a word the wizard addressed him: "I know for
what you have come; you want to take the princess away. Well, be it so!
Take her, if you can keep her in sight for three nights, so that she
doesn't vanish from you. If she vanishes, you will be turned into stone
as well as your three servants; like all who have come before you." He
then motioned the princess to a seat and departed.
The prince could not take his eyes off the princess, so beautiful was
she. He began to talk to her, and asked her all manner of questions, but
she neither answered nor smiled, nor looked at any one more than if she
had been of marble. He sat down by her, and determined not to sleep all
night long lest she should vanish from him, and, to make surer, Long
extended himself like a strap, and wound himself round the whole room
along the wall; Broad posted himself in the doorway, swelled himself up,
and stopped it up so tight that not even a mouse could have slipped
through; while Sharpsight placed himself against a pillar in the midst
of the room on the look-out. But after a time they all began to nod,
fell asleep, and slept the whole night, just as if the wizard had thrown
them into the water.
In the morning, when it began to dawn, the prince was the first to wake,
but--as if a knife had been thrust into his heart--the princess was
gone! He forthwith awoke his servants, and asked what was to be done.
"Never mind, sir," said Sharpsight, and looked sharply out through the
window, "I see her already. A hundred miles hence is a forest, in the
midst of the forest an old oak, and on the top of the oak an acorn, and
she is that acorn." Long immediately took him on his shoulders, extended
himself, and went ten miles at a step, while Sharpsight showed him the
way.
No more time elapsed than would have been wanted to move once round a
cottage before they were back again, and Long delivered the acorn to the
prince. "Sir, let it fall on the ground." The prince let it fall and
that moment the princess stood beside him. And when the sun began to
show itself beyond the mountains, the folding doors flew open with a
crash, and the wizard entered the room and smiled spitefully; but when
he saw the princess he frowned, growled, and bang! one of the iron hoops
which he wore splintered and sprang off him. He then took the damsel by
the hand and led her away.
The whole day after the prince had nothing to do but walk up and down
the castle, and round about the castle, and look at the wonderful
things that were there. It was everywhere as if life had been lost in a
single moment. In one hall he saw a prince, who held in both hands a
brandished sword, as if he intended to cleave somebody in twain; but the
blow never fell: he had been turned into stone. In one chamber was a
knight turned into stone, just as if he had been fleeing from some one
in terror, and, stumbling on the threshold, had taken a downward
direction, but not fallen. Under the chimney sat a servant, who held in
one hand a piece of roast meat, and with the other lifted a mouthful
toward his mouth, which never reached it; when it was just in front of
his mouth, he had also been turned to stone. Many others he saw there
turned to stone, each in the position in which he was when the wizard
said, "Be turned into stone." He likewise saw many fine horses turned to
stone, and in the castle and round the castle all was desolate and dead;
there were trees, but without leaves; there were meadows, but without
grass; there was a river but it did not flow; nowhere was there even a
singing bird, or a flower, the offspring of the ground, or a white fish
in the water.
Morning, noon, and evening the prince and his companions found good and
abundant entertainment in the castle; the viands came of themselves, the
wine poured itself out. After supper the folding doors opened again, and
the wizard brought in the princess for the prince to guard. And although
they all determined to exert themselves with all their might not to fall
asleep, yet it was of no use, fall asleep again they did. And when the
prince awoke at dawn and saw the princess had vanished, he jumped up and
pulled Sharpsight by the arm, "Hey! get up, Sharpsight, do you know
where the princess is?" He rubbed his eyes, looked, and said: "I see
her. There's a mountain two hundred miles off, and in the mountain a
rock, and in the rock a precious stone, and she's that precious stone.
If Long carries me thither, we shall obtain her."
Long took him at once on his shoulders, extended himself, and went
twenty miles at a step. Sharpsight fixed his flaming eyes on the
mountain, the mountain crumbled, and the rock in it split into a
thousand pieces, and amongst them glittered the precious stone. They
took it up and brought it to the prince, and when he let it fall on the
ground, the princess again stood there. When afterward the wizard came
and saw her there, his eyes flashed with spite, and bang! again an iron
hoop cracked upon him and flew off. He growled and led the princess out
of the room.
That day all was again as it had been the day before. After supper the
wizard brought the princess in again, looked the prince keenly in the
face, and scornfully uttered the words, "It will be seen who's a match
for whom; whether you are victorious or I," and with that he departed.
This night they all exerted themselves still more to avoid going to
sleep. They wouldn't even sit down, they wanted to walk about all night
long, but all in vain; they were bewitched; one fell asleep after the
other as he walked and the princess vanished away from them.
In the morning the prince again awoke earliest, and, when he didn't see
the princess, woke Sharpsight. "Hey! get up, Sharpsight! look where the
princess is!" Sharpsight looked out for a long time. "Oh, sir," says he,
"she is a long way off, a long way off! Three hundred miles off is a
black sea, and in the midst of the sea a shell on the bottom, and in
the shell is a gold ring, and she's the ring. But never mind! we shall
obtain her, but to-day Long must take Broad with him as well; we shall
want him." Long took Sharpsight on one shoulder, and Broad on the other,
and went thirty miles at a step. When they came to the black sea,
Sharpsight showed him where he must reach into the water for the shell.
Long extended his hand as far as he could, but could not reach the
bottom.
"Wait, comrades! wait only a little and I'll help you," said Broad, and
swelled himself out as far as his paunch would stretch; he then lay down
on the shore and drank. In a very short time the water fell so low that
Long easily reached the bottom and took the shell out of the sea. Out of
it he extracted the ring, took his comrades on his shoulders and
hastened back. But on the way he found it a little difficult to run with
Broad, who had half a sea of water inside him, so he cast him from his
shoulder on to the ground in a wide valley. Thump he went like a sack
let fall from a tower, and in a moment the whole valley was under water
like a vast lake. Broad himself barely crawled out of it.
Meanwhile the prince was in great trouble in the castle. The dawn began
to display itself over the mountains, and his servants had not returned;
the more brilliantly the rays ascended, the greater was his anxiety; a
deadly perspiration came out upon his forehead. Soon the sun showed
itself in the east like a thin slip of flame--and then with a loud crash
the door flew open, and on the threshold stood the wizard. He looked
round the room, and seeing the princess was not there, laughed a hateful
laugh and entered the room. But just at that moment, pop! the window
flew in pieces, the gold ring fell on the floor, and in an instant there
stood the princess again. Sharpsight, seeing what was going on in the
castle, and in what danger his master was, told Long. Long made a step,
and threw the ring through the window into the room. The wizard roared
with rage till the castle quaked, and then, bang! went the third iron
hoop that was round his waist, and sprang off him; the wizard turned
into a raven, and flew out and away through the shattered window.
Then, and not till then, did the beautiful damsel speak and thank the
prince for setting her free, and blushed like a rose. In the castle and
round the castle everything became alive again at once. He who was
holding in the hall the outstretched sword, swung it into the air, which
whistled again, and then returned it to its sheath; he who was stumbling
on the threshold, fell on the ground, but immediately got up again and
felt his nose to see whether it was still entire; he who was sitting
under the chimney put the piece of meat into his mouth and went on
eating; and thus everybody completed what he had begun doing, and at the
point where he had left off. In the stables the horses merrily stamped
and snorted, the trees round the castle became green like periwinkles,
the meadows were full of variegated flowers, high in the air warbled the
skylark, and abundance of small fishes appeared in the clear river.
Everywhere was life, everywhere enjoyment.
Meanwhile a number of gentlemen assembled in the room where the prince
was, and all thanked him for their liberation. But he said: "You have
nothing to thank me for; if it had not been for my trusty servants Long,
Broad, and Sharpsight, I too, should have been what you were." He then
immediately started on his way home to the old king, his father, with
his bride and servants. On the way they met Broad and took him with
them.
The old king wept for joy at the success of his son; he had thought he
would return no more. Soon afterward there was a grand wedding, the
festivities of which lasted three weeks; all the gentlemen that the
prince had liberated were invited. After the wedding Long, Broad, and
Sharpsight announced to the young king that they were going again into
the world to look for work. The young king tried to persuade them to
stay with him. "I will give you everything you want, as long as you
live," said he; "you needn't work at all." But they didn't like such an
idle life, took leave of him, went away, and have been ever since
knocking about somewhere or other in the world.
XI
INTELLIGENCE AND LUCK
Once upon a time Luck met Intelligence on a garden-seat. "Make room for
me!" said Luck. Intelligence was then as yet inexperienced, and didn't
know who ought to make room for whom. He said: "Why should I make room
for you? you're no better than I." "He's the better man," answered Luck,
"who performs most. See you there yon peasant's son who's ploughing in
the field? Enter into him, and if he gets on better through you than
through me, I'll always submissively make way for you, whensoever and
wheresoever we meet." Intelligence agreed, and entered at once into the
ploughboy's head. As soon as the ploughboy felt that he had intelligence
in his head, he began to think: "Why must I follow the plough to the day
of my death? I can go somewhere else and make my fortune more easily."
He left off ploughing, put up the plough, and drove home. "Daddy," says
he, "I don't like this peasant's life; I'd rather learn to be a
gardener." His father said: "What ails you, Vanek? have you lost your
wits?" However, he bethought himself and said: "Well, if you will,
learn, and God be with you! Your brother will be heir to the cottage
after me." Vanek lost the cottage, but he didn't care for that, but went
and put himself apprentice to the king's gardener. For every little that
the gardener showed him, Vanek comprehended ever so much more. Ere long
he didn't even obey the gardener's orders as to how he ought to do
anything, but did everything his own way. At first the gardener was
angry, but, seeing everything thus getting on better, he was content. "I
see that you've more intelligence than I," said he, and henceforth let
Vanek garden as he thought fit. In no long space of time Vanek made the
garden so beautiful that the king took great delight in it, and
frequently walked in it with the queen and with his only daughter.
The princess was a very beautiful damsel, but ever since she was twelve
years old she had ceased speaking, and no one ever heard a single word
from her. The king was much grieved, and caused a proclamation to be
made that whoever should bring it to pass that she should speak again,
should be her husband. Many young kings, princes, and other great lords
announced themselves one after the other, but all went away as they had
come; no one succeeded in causing her to speak. "Why shouldn't I try my
luck?" thought Vanek; "who knows whether I mayn't succeed in bringing
her to answer when I ask her a question?" He at once caused himself to
be announced at the palace, and the king and his councillors conducted
him into the room where the princess was. The king's daughter had a
pretty little dog, and was very fond of him, because he was so clever,
understanding everything that she wanted. When Vanek went into the room
with the king and his councillors, he made as if he didn't even see the
princess, but turned to the dog and said: "I have heard, doggie, that
you are very clever, and I come to you for advice. We are three
companions in travel, a sculptor, a tailor, and myself. Once upon a time
we were going through a forest and were obliged to pass the night in it.
To be safe from wolves, we made a fire, and agreed to keep watch one
after the other. The sculptor kept watch first, and for amusement to
kill time took a log and carved a damsel out of it. When it was
finished, he woke the tailor to keep watch in his turn. The tailor,
seeing the wooden damsel, asked what it meant. 'As you see,' said the
sculptor, 'I was weary, and didn't know what to do with myself, so I
carved a damsel out of a log; if you find time hang heavy on your hands,
you can dress her.' The tailor at once took out his scissors, needle and
thread, cut out the clothes, stitched away, and, when they were ready,
dressed the damsel in them. He then called me to come and keep watch. I,
too, asked him what the meaning of all this was. 'As you see,' said the
tailor, 'the sculptor found time hang heavy on his hands and carved a
damsel out of a log, and I for the same reason clothed her; and if you
find time hanging on your hands, you can teach her to speak.' And by
morning dawn I had actually taught her to speak. But in the morning when
my companions woke up, each wanted to possess the damsel. The sculptor
said, 'I made her;' the tailor, 'I clothed her.' I, too, maintained my
right. Tell me, therefore, doggie, to which of us the damsel belongs."
The dog said nothing, but instead of the dog the princess replied: "To
whom can she belong but to yourself? What's the good of the sculptor's
damsel without life? What's the good of the tailor's dressing without
speech? You gave her the best gift, life and speech, and therefore she
by right belongs to you." "You have passed your own sentence," said
Vanek; "I have given you speech again and a new life, and you therefore
by right belong to me." Then said one of the king's councillors: "His
Royal Grace will give you a plenteous reward for succeeding in unloosing
his daughter's tongue; but you cannot have her to wife, as you are of
mean lineage." The king said: "You are of mean lineage; I will give you
a plenteous reward instead of our daughter." But Vanek wouldn't hear of
any other reward, and said: "The king promised without any exception,
that whoever caused his daughter to speak again should be her husband. A
king's word is law; and if the king wants others to observe his laws, he
must first keep them himself. Therefore the king must give me his
daughter." "Seize and bind him!" shouted the councillor. "Whoever says
the king must do anything, offers an insult to his Majesty, and is
worthy of death. May it please your Majesty to order this malefactor to
be executed with the sword?" The king said: "Let him be executed." Vanek
was immediately bound and led to execution. When they came to the place
of execution Luck was there waiting for him, and said secretly to
Intelligence: "See how this man has got on through you, till he has to
lose his head! Make way, and let me take your place!" As soon as Luck
entered Vanek, the executioners sword broke against the scaffold, just
as if some one had snapped it; and before they brought him another, up
rode a trumpeter on horseback from the city, galloping as swift as a
bird, trumpeted merrily, and waved a white flag, and after him came the
royal carriage for Vanek. This is what had happened: The princess had
told her father at home that Vanek had but spoken the truth, and the
king's word ought not to be broken. If Vanek were of mean lineage the
king could easily make him a prince. The king said: "You're right; let
him be a prince!" The royal carriage was immediately sent for Vanek, and
the councillor who had irritated the king against him was executed in
his stead. Afterward, when Vanek and the princess were going together in
a carriage from the wedding, Intelligence happened to be somewhere on
the road, and seeing that he couldn't help meeting Luck, bent his head
and slipped on one side, just as if cold water had been thrown upon him.
And from that time forth it is said that Intelligence has always given a
wide berth to Luck whenever he has had to meet him.
XII
GEORGE WITH THE GOAT
There was a king who had a daughter who never could be induced to laugh;
she was always sad. So the king proclaimed that she should be given to
any one who could cause her to laugh. There was also a shepherd who had
a son named George. He said: "Daddy! I, too, will go to see whether I
can make her laugh. I want nothing from you but the goat." His father
said, "Well, go." The goat was of such a nature that, when her master
wished, she detained everybody, and that person was obliged to stay by
So he took the goat and went, and met a man who had a foot on his
shoulder. George said: "Why have you a foot on your shoulder?" He
replied: "If I take it off, I leap a hundred miles." "Whither are you
going?" "I am going in search of service, to see if any one will take
me." "Well, come with us."
They went on, and again met a man who had a bandage on his eyes. "Why
have you a bandage on your eyes?" He answered, "If I remove the bandage,
I see a hundred miles." "Whither are you going?" "I am going in search
of service, if you will take me." "Yes, I'll take you. Come also with
They went on a bit farther, and met another fellow, who had a bottle
under his arm, and, instead of a stopper, held his thumb in it. "Why do
you hold your thumb there?" "If I pull it out, I squirt a hundred miles,
and besprinkle everything that I choose. If you like, take me also into
your service; it may be to your advantage and ours too." George replied:
"Well, come, too!"
Afterward they came to the town where the king lived, and bought a
silken riband for the goat. They came to an inn, and orders had already
been given there beforehand, that when such people came, they were to
give them what they liked to eat and drink--the king would pay for all.
So they tied the goat with that very riband and placed it in the
innkeeper's room to be taken care of, and he put it in the side room
where his daughters slept. The innkeeper had three maiden daughters, who
were not yet asleep. So Manka said: "Oh! if I, too, could have such a
riband! I will go and unfasten it from that goat." The second, Dodla,
said: "Don't; he'll find it out in the morning." But she went
notwithstanding. And when Manka did not return for a long time, the
third, Kate, said: "Go, fetch her." So Dodla went, and gave Manka a pat
on the back. "Come, leave it alone!" And now she, too, was unable to
withdraw herself from her. So Kate said: "Come, don't unfasten it!" Kate
went and gave Dodla a pat on the petticoat; and now she, too, couldn't
get away, but was obliged to stay by her.
In the morning George made haste and went for the goat, and led the
whole set away--Kate Dodla, and Manka. The innkeeper was still asleep.
They went through the village, and the judge looked out of a window and
said, "Fie, Kate! what's this? what's this?" He went and took her by the
hand, wishing to pull her away, but remained also by her. After this, a
cowherd drove some cows through a narrow street, and the bull came
rushing round; he stuck fast, and George led him, too, in the
procession.
Thus they afterward came in front of the castle, and the servants came
out-of-doors; and when they saw such things they went and told the
king. "Oh, sire, we have such a spectacle here; we have already had all
manner of masquerades, but this has never been here yet." So they
immediately led the king's daughter to the square in front of the
castle, and she looked and laughed till the castle shook.
Now they asked him what sort of person he was. He said that he was a
shepherd's son, and was named George. They said that it could not be
done; for he was of mean lineage, and they could not give him the
damsel; but he must accomplish something more for them. He said, "What?"
They replied that there was a spring yonder, a hundred miles off; if he
brought a goblet of water from it in a minute, then he should obtain the
damsel. So George said to the man who had the foot on his shoulder: "You
said that if you took the foot down, you could jump a hundred miles." He
replied: "I'll easily do that." He took the foot down, jumped, and was
there. But after this there was only a very little time to spare, and by
then he ought to have been back. So George said to the other: "You said
that if you removed the bandage from your eyes, you could see a hundred
miles. Peep and see what is going on." "Ah, sir! Goodness gracious! he's
fallen asleep!" "That will be a bad job," said George; "the time will be
up. You, third man, you said if you pulled your thumb out, you could
squirt a hundred miles; be quick and squirt thither, that he may get up.
And you, look whether he is moving, or what." "Oh, sir, he's getting up
now; he's knocking the dust off; he's drawing the water." He then gave a
jump, and was there exactly in time.
After this they said that he must perform one task more; that yonder, in
a rock, was a wild beast, a unicorn, of such a nature that he destroyed
a great many of their people; if he cleared him out of the world he
should obtain the damsel. So he took his people and went into the
forest. They came to a firwood. There were three wild beasts, and three
lairs had been formed by wallowing as they lay. Two did nothing: but the
third destroyed the people. So they took some stones and some pine-cones
in their pockets, and climbed up into a tree; and when the beasts lay
down, they dropped a stone down upon that one which was the unicorn. He
said to the next: "Be quiet; don't butt me." It said: "I'm not doing
anything to you." Again they let a stone fall from above upon the
unicorn. "Be quiet! you've already done it to me twice." "Indeed, I'm
doing nothing to you." So they attacked each other and fought together.
The unicorn wanted to pierce the second beast through; but it jumped out
of the way, and he rushed so violently after it, that he struck his horn
into a tree, and couldn't pull it out quickly. So they sprang speedily
down from the fir, and the other two beasts ran away and escaped, but
they cut off the head of the third, the unicorn, took it up, and carried
it to the castle.
Now those in the castle saw that George had again accomplished that
task. "What, prithee, shall we do? Perhaps we must after all give him
the damsel!" "No, sire," said one of the attendants, "that cannot be; he
is too lowborn to obtain a king's daughter! On the contrary, we must
clear him out of the world." So the king ordered them to note his words,
what he should say. There was a hired female servant there, and she said
to him: "George, it will be evil for you to-day; they're going to clear
you out of the world." He answered: "Oh, I'm not afraid. When I was only
just twelve years old, I killed twelve of them at one blow!" But this
was the fact: when his mother was baking a flat-cake, a dozen flies
settled upon her, and he killed them all at a single blow.
When they heard this, they said: "Nothing else will do but we must shoot
him." So they drew up the soldiers, and said they would hold a review in
his honour, for they would celebrate the wedding in the square before
the castle. Then they conducted him thither, and the soldiers were
already going to let fly at him. But George said to the man who held his
thumb in the bottle in the place of a stopper: "You said, if you pulled
your thumb out, you could besprinkle everything. Pull it out--quick!"
"Oh, sir, I'll easily perform that." So he pulled out his thumb and gave
them all such a sprinkling that they were all blind, and not one could
see.
So, when they perceived that nothing else was to be done, they told him
to go, for they would give him the damsel. Then they gave him a handsome
royal robe, and the wedding took place. I, too, was at the wedding; they
had music there, sang, ate, and drank; there was meat, there were
cheesecakes, and baskets full of everything, and buckets full of strong
waters. To-day I went, yesterday I came; I found an egg among the
tree-stumps; I knocked it against somebody's head, and gave him a bald
place, and he's got it still.
XIII
THE WONDERFUL HAIR
There was a man who was very poor, but so well supplied with children
that he was utterly unable to maintain them, and one morning more than
once prepared to kill them, in order not to see their misery in dying of
hunger, but his wife prevented him. One night a child came to him in his
sleep, and said to him: "Man! I see that you are making up your mind to
destroy and to kill your poor little children, and I know that you are
distressed there at; but in the morning you will find under your pillow
a mirror, a red kerchief, and an embroidered pocket-handkerchief; take
all three secretly and tell nobody; then go to such a hill; by it you
will find a stream; go along it till you come to its fountain-head;
there you will find a damsel as bright as the sun, with her hair hanging
down over her back. Be on your guard, that the ferocious she-dragon do
not coil round you; do not converse with her if she speaks; for if you
converse with her, she will poison you, and turn you into a fish or
something else, and will then devour you but if she bids you examine her
head, examine it, and as you turn over her hair, look, and you will find
one hair as red as blood; pull it out and run back again; then, if she
suspects and begins to run after you, throw her first the embroidered
pocket-handkerchief, then the kerchief, and, lastly, the mirror; then
she will find occupation for herself. And sell that hair to some rich
man; but don't let them cheat you, for that hair is worth countless
wealth; and you will thus enrich yourself and maintain your children."
When the poor man awoke, he found everything under his pillow, just as
the child had told him in his sleep; and then he went to the hill. When
there, he found the stream, went on and on alongside of it, till he came
to the fountain-head. Having looked about him to see where the damsel
was, he espied her above a piece of water, like sunbeams threaded on a
needle, and she was embroidering at a frame on stuff, the threads of
which were young men's hair. As soon as he saw her, he made a reverence
to her, and she stood on her feet and questioned him: "Whence are you,
unknown young man?" But he held his tongue. She questioned him again:
"Who are you? Why have you come?" and much else of all sorts; but he was
as mute as a stone, making signs with his hands, as if he were deaf and
wanted help. Then she told him to sit down on her skirt. He did not wait
for any more orders, but sat down, and she bent down her head to him,
that he might examine it. Turning over the hair of her head, as if to
examine it, he was not long in finding that red hair, and separated it
from the other hair, pulled it out, jumped off her skirt and ran away
back as he best could. She noticed it, and ran at his heels full speed
after him. He looked round, and seeing that she was about to overtake
him, threw, as he was told, the embroidered pocket-handkerchief on the
way, and when she saw the pocket-handkerchief she stooped and began to
overhaul it in every direction, admiring the embroidery, till he had got
a good way off. Then the damsel placed the pocket-handkerchief in her
bosom, and ran after him again. When he saw that she was about to
overtake him, he threw the red kerchief, and she again occupied
herself, admiring and gazing, till the poor man had again got a good way
off. Then the damsel became exasperated, and threw both the
pocket-handkerchief and the kerchief on the way, and ran after him in
pursuit. Again, when he saw that she was about to overtake him, he threw
the mirror. When the damsel came to the mirror, the like of which she
had never seen before, she lifted it up, and when she saw herself in it,
not knowing that it was herself, but thinking that it was somebody else,
she, as it were, fell in love with herself in the mirror, and the man
got so far off that she was no longer able to overtake him. When she saw
that she could not catch him, she turned back, and the man reached his
home safe and sound. After arriving at his home, he showed his wife the
hair, and told her all that had happened to him, but she began to jeer
and laugh at him. But he paid no attention to her, and went to a town to
sell the hair. A crowd of all sorts of people and merchants collected
round him; one offered a sequin, another two, and so on, higher and
higher, till they came to a hundred gold sequins. Just then the emperor
heard of the hair, summoned the man into his presence, and said to him
that he would give him a thousand sequins for it, and he sold it to him.
What was the hair? The emperor split it in two from top to bottom, and
found registered in it in writing many remarkable things, which happened
in the olden time since the beginning of the world. Thus the man became
rich and lived on with his wife and children. And that child, that came
to him in his sleep, was an angel sent by the Lord God, whose will it
was to aid the poor man, and to reveal secrets which had not been
revealed till then.
XIV
THE DRAGON AND THE PRINCE
There was an emperor who had three sons. One day the eldest son went out
hunting, and, when he got outside the town, up sprang a hare out of a
bush, and he after it, and hither and thither, till the hare fled into a
water-mill, and the prince after it. But it was not a hare, but a
dragon, and it waited for the prince and devoured him. When several days
had elapsed and the prince did not return home, people began to wonder
why it was that he was not to be found. Then the middle son went
hunting, and as he issued from the town, a hare sprang out of a bush,
and the prince after it, and hither and thither, till the hare fled into
the water-mill and the prince after it; but it was not a hare, but a
dragon, which waited for and devoured him. When some days had elapsed
and the princes did not return, either of them, the whole court was in
sorrow. Then the third son went hunting, to see whether he could not
find his brothers. When he issued from the town, again up sprang a hare
out of a bush, and the prince after it, and hither and thither, till the
hare fled into the water-mill. But the prince did not choose to follow
it, but went to find other game, saying to himself: "When I return I
shall find you." After thus he went for a long time up and down the
hill, but found nothing, and then returned to the water-mill; but when
he got there, there was only an old woman in the mill. The prince
invoked God in addressing her: "God help you, old woman!" The old woman
replied: "God help you, my son!" Then the prince asked her: "Where, old
woman, is my hare?" She replied: "My son, that was not a hare, but a
dragon. It kills and throttles many people." Hearing this, the prince
was somewhat disturbed, and said to the old woman: "What shall we do
now? Doubtless my two brothers also have perished here." The old woman
answered: "They have indeed; but there's no help for it. Go home, my
son, lest you follow them." Then he said to her: "Dear old woman, do you
know what? I know that you will be glad to liberate yourself from that
pest." The old woman interrupted him: "How should I not? It captured me,
too, in this way, but now I have no means of escape." Then he proceeded:
"Listen well to what I am going to say to you. Ask it whither it goes
and where its strength is; then kiss all that place where it tells you
its strength is, as if from love, till you ascertain it, and afterward
tell me when I come." Then the prince went off to the palace, and the
old woman remained in the water-mill. When the dragon came in, the old
woman began to question it: "Where in God's name have you been? Whither
do you go so far? You will never tell me whither you go." The dragon
replied: "Well, my dear old woman, I do go far." Then the old woman
began to coax it: "And why do you go so far? Tell me where your strength
is. If I knew where your strength is, I don't know what I should do for
love; I would kiss all that place." Thereupon the dragon smiled and said
to her: "Yonder is my strength, in that fireplace." Then the old woman
began to fondle and kiss the fireplace, and the dragon on seeing it
burst into a laugh and said to her: "Silly old woman, my strength isn't
there; my strength is in that tree-fungus in front of the house." Then
the old woman began again to fondle and kiss the tree, and the dragon
again laughed, and said to her: "Away, old woman! my strength isn't
there." Then the old woman inquired: "Where is it?" The dragon began to
give an account in detail: "My strength is a long way off, and you
cannot go thither. Far in another empire under the emperor's city is a
lake, in that lake is a dragon, and in that dragon a boar, and in the
boar a pigeon, and in that is my strength." The next morning when the
dragon went away from the mill, the prince came to the old woman, and
the old woman told him all that she had heard from the dragon. Then he
left his home, and disguised himself; he put shepherd's boots to his
feet, took a shepherd's staff in his hand, and went into the world. As
he went on thus from village to village, and from town to town, at last
he came into another empire and into the imperial city, in a lake under
which the dragon was. On going into the town he began to inquire who
wanted a shepherd. The citizens told him that the emperor did. Then he
went straight to the emperor. After he announced himself, the emperor
admitted him into his presence, and asked him: "Do you wish to keep
sheep?" He replied: "I do, illustrious crown!" Then the emperor engaged
him, and began to inform and instruct him: "There is here a lake, and
alongside of the lake very beautiful pasture, and when you call the
sheep out, they go thither at once, and spread themselves round the
lake; but whatever shepherd goes off there, that shepherd returns back
no more. Therefore, my son, I tell you, don't let the sheep have their
own way and go where they will, but keep them where you will." The
prince thanked the emperor, got himself ready, and called out the sheep,
taking with him, more-over, two hounds that could catch a boar in the
open country, and a falcon that could capture any bird, and carrying
also a pair of bagpipes. When he called out the sheep he let them go at
once to the lake, and when the sheep arrived at the lake, they
immediately spread round it, and the prince placed the falcon on a
stump, and the hounds and bagpipes under the stump, then tucked up his
hose and sleeves, waded into the lake, and began to shout: "Dragon,
dragon! come out to single combat with me to-day that we may measure
ourselves together, unless you're a woman."The dragon called out in
reply, "I will do so now, prince--now!" Erelong behold the dragon! it is
large, it is terrible, it is disgusting! When the dragon came out, it
seized him by the waist, and they wrestled a summer day till afternoon.
But when the heat of afternoon came on, the dragon said: "Let me go,
prince, that I may moisten my parched head in the lake, and toss you to
the sky." But the prince replied: "Come, dragon, don't talk nonsense; if
I had the emperor's daughter to kiss me on the forehead, I would toss
you still higher." Thereupon, the dragon suddenly let him go, and went
off into the lake. On the approach of evening, he washed and got himself
up nicely, placed the falcon on his arm, the hounds behind him, and the
bagpipes under his arm, then drove the sheep and went into the town
playing on the bagpipes. When he arrived at the town, the whole town
assembled as to see a wondrous sight because he had come, whereas
previously no shepherd had been able to come from the lake. The next day
the prince got ready again, and went with his sheep straight to the
lake. But the emperor sent two grooms after him to go stealthily and see
what he did, and they placed themselves on a high hill whence they could
have a good view. When the shepherd arrived, he put the hounds and
bagpipes under the stump and the falcon upon it, then tucked up his hose
and sleeves waded into the lake and shouted: "Dragon, dragon! come out
to single combat with me, that we may measure ourselves once more
together, unless you are a woman!" The dragon replied: "I will do so,
prince, now, now!" Erelong, behold the dragon! it was large, it was
terrible, it was disgusting! And it seized him by the waist and wrestled
with him a summer's day till afternoon. But when the afternoon heat came
on, the dragon said: "Let me go, prince, that I may moisten my parched
head in the lake, and may toss you to the sky." The prince replied:
"Come, dragon, don't talk nonsense; if I had the emperor's daughter to
kiss me on the forehead, I would toss you still higher." Thereupon the
dragon suddenly left hold of him, and went off into the lake. When night
approached the prince drove the sheep as before, and went home playing
the bagpipes When he arrived at the town, the whole town was astir and
began to wonder because the shepherd came home every evening, which no
one had been able to do before. Those two grooms had already arrived at
the palace before the prince, and related to the emperor in order
everything that they had heard and seen. Now when the emperor saw that
the shepherd returned home, he immediately summoned his daughter into
his presence and told her all, what it was and how it was. "But," said
he, "to-morrow you must go with the shepherd to the lake and kiss him on
the forehead." When she heard this she burst into tears and began to
entreat her father. "You have no one but me, and I am your only
daughter, and you don't care about me if I perish." Then the emperor
began to persuade and encourage her: "Don't fear, my daughter; you see
we have had so many changes of shepherds, and of all that went out to
the lake not one has returned; but he had been contending with the
dragon for two whole days and it has done him no hurt. I assure you, in
God's name, that he is able to overcome the dragon, only go to-morrow
with him to see whether he will free us from this mischief which has
destroyed so many people."
When, on the morrow, the day dawned and the sun came forth, up rose the
shepherd, up rose the maiden too, to begin to prepare for going to the
lake. The shepherd was cheerful, more cheerful than ever, but the
emperor's daughter was sad and shed tears. The shepherd comforted her:
"Lady sister, I pray you, do not weep, but do what I tell you. When it
is time, run up and kiss me, and fear not." As he went and drove the
sheep, the shepherd was thoroughly cheery, and played a merry tune on
his bagpipes; but the damsel did nothing but weep as she went beside
him, and he several times left off playing and turned toward her: "Weep
not, golden one; fear nought." When they arrived at the lake, the sheep
immediately spread round it, and the prince placed the falcon on the
stump, and the hounds and bagpipes under it, then tucked up his hose and
sleeves, waded into the water, and shouted: "Dragon! dragon! Come out to
single combat with me; let us measure ourselves once more, unless you're
a woman!" The dragon replied: "I will, prince; now, now!" Erelong,
there was the dragon! it was huge, it was terrible, it was disgusting!
When it came out, they seized each other by the middle, and wrestled a
summer's day till afternoon. But when the afternoon heat came on, the
dragon said: "Let me go, prince, that I may moisten my parched head in
the lake, and toss you to the skies." The prince replied: "Come, dragon,
don't talk nonsense; if I had the emperor's daughter to kiss me on the
forehead, I would toss you much higher." When he said this, the
emperor's daughter ran up and kissed him on the face, on the eye, and on
the forehead. Then he swung the dragon, and tossed it high into the air,
and when it fell to the ground it burst into pieces. But as it burst
into pieces, out of it sprang a wild boar, and started to run away. But
the prince shouted to his shepherd dogs: "Hold it! don't let it go!" and
the dogs sprang up and after it, caught it, and soon tore it to pieces.
But out of the boar flew a pigeon, and the prince loosed the falcon, and
the falcon caught the pigeon and brought it into the prince's hands. The
prince said to it: "Tell me now, where are my brothers?" The pigeon
replied: "I will; only do me no harm. Immediately behind your father's
town is a water-mill, and in the water-mill are three wands that have
sprouted up. Cut these three wands up from below, and strike with them
upon their root; an iron door will immediately open into a large vault.
In that vault are many people, old and young, rich and poor, small and
great, wives and maidens, so that you could settle a populous empire;
there, too, are your brothers." When the pigeon had told him all this,
the prince immediately wrung its neck.
The emperor had gone out in person, and posted himself on the hill from
which the grooms had viewed the shepherd, and he, too, was a spectator
of all that had taken place. After the shepherd had thus obtained the
dragon's head, twilight began to approach. He washed himself nicely,
took the falcon on his shoulder, the hounds behind him, and the bagpipes
under his arm, played as he went, drove the sheep, and proceeded to the
emperor's palace, with the damsel at his side still in terror. When they
came to the town, all the town assembled as to see a wonder. The
emperor, who had seen all his heroism from the hill, called him into
his presence, and gave him his daughter, went immediately to church, had
them married, and held a wedding festival for a week. After this the
prince told him who and whence he was, and the emperor and the whole
town rejoiced still more. Then, as the prince was urgent to go to his
own home, the emperor gave him a large escort, and equipped him for the
journey. When they were in the neighbourhood of the water-mill, the
prince halted his attendants, went inside, cut up the three wands, and
struck the root with them, and the iron door opened at once. In the
vault was a vast multitude of people. The prince ordered them to come
out one by one, and go whither each would, and stood himself at the
door. They came out thus one after another, and lo! there were his
brothers also, whom he embraced and kissed. When the whole multitude had
come out, they thanked him for releasing and delivering them, and went
each to his own home. But he went to his father's house with his
brothers and bride, and there lived and reigned to the end of his days.
[Footnote 6: This is intended as an insult. "Azhdaja," a dragon, is
feminine in Servian.]
XV
THE GOOD CHILDREN
The Lord was angered at mankind, and for three years there was a great
famine over all the world; nowhere in the world was even a grain of corn
produced, and what people sowed failed to come up from a drought so
great that for three years there was not a drop of rain or dew. For one
year more people managed to live somehow or other, thrashing up what old
corn there was; the rich made money, for corn rose very high. Autumn
came. Where anybody had or purchased old seed, they sowed it; and
entreated the Lord, hoped in the love of God, if God would give
fertility, "if God would forgive our sins." But it was not so. They did
not obtain the love of God. When they cast the seed into the holy earth,
that was the last they saw of it; if it germinated somewhat, if it sent
up shoots, it withered away close to the ground. Woe! and abundance of
it! God's world went on, sorrowed and wept, for now it was manifest
that death by hunger was approaching. They somehow got miserably through
the winter. Spring came. Where anybody had still any grain, they sowed
it. What would come to pass? No blessing was poured forth, for the
thought began with wind. Moreover, there was but little snow in the
winter, and everything dried up so that the black earth remained as it
was. It now came to this--all the world began to perish! The people
died; the cattle perished; as misery carried them, so did the people
proceed.
There was at that time a powerful emperor in a certain empire: as the
young ordinarily cleave to the young, so would he associate only with
young men. Whether in council or in office or in the army, there were
none but young men; no old men had access to anything anywhere. Well, as
young men, unripe in understanding, were the councillors, so was their
counsel also unripe. One year passed; a second passed; then, in the
third year, they saw that misery was already on every side, that it was
already coming to this, that all the world would perish. The young
emperor assembled his young council, and they began to advise after
their fashion; they advised, they advised, and ah! the resolutions they
came to were such that it is a sin even to give an account of their
resolutions! Well, the emperor made proclamation after their advice,
that all old people were to be drowned, in order that, said he, bread
might not be wasted in vain, but there might be a supply of bread for
the young; and that no one should venture, on pain of death, to maintain
or harbour any old man. Well, heralds went about throughout the whole
country, and promulgated the emperor's command everywhere--yea, brigands
seized old people where they chose, and drowned them without mercy.
There were then in a certain place three own brothers, who had an aged
father. When they heard of this edict, they told their father; and their
father said: "My sons, such is the will of God and the will of the
emperor; take me, let me perish at once, only that you, my children, may
live on. I am already with one foot in the grave," "No, our own daddy!
we will die, but we will not give you up," cried the good sons with one
voice, and fell upon his neck; "we will keep you; we will take from our
own mouths, and will nourish you."
The three brothers took their aged father, conducted him into their
cottage, dug under the raised portion of the floor, made up a bed with
sheets and frieze-coats, for straw was scarce, and placed the old man
there, brought him a loaf of bread as black as the holy earth, and
covered him over with the floor. There the old man abode for two or
three months, and his sons brought him clandestinely all they had. The
summer passed without harvest, without mowing. September passed too.
Autumn passed without joy. Winter passed too. Now came spring; the sun
became warm. It was now time to sow, but there was no seed. The world
was large, but there was no seed-corn. When one kind was used up, the
people sowed others, hoping that there would be a crop; but when they
cast it into the holy earth, it rotted there. It seemed as if the end of
the world were come.
Then the three sons went to their father, and asked him: "Daddy, what
shall we do? It's time to sow. God is now sending showers of rain; the
earth is warmed and is crumbling like grits; but of seed there is not a
blessed grain," "Take, my sons, and strip the old roof off the house,
and thresh the bundles and sow the chaff." The lads stripped the house
and barn (anyhow, there was nothing in it), and threshed away till the
sweat ran from their brows, so that they crushed the bundles as small as
poppy-seeds. When they sowed, God gave a blessing; so in a week's time
it became green like rue; in a month's time, in two months' time, there
was corn, ever so much--ever so much, and all manner of seed was found
there: there was rye, there was wheat and barley; yea, maybe, there was
also a plant or two of buckwheat and millet. Wherever you went
throughout the world there was no corn to be seen; all the plain was
overgrown with grasses, steppe-grasses, and thistles, but with them
was corn like a forest. How people wondered and were astounded! The fame
thereof went over the whole world, and the news reached the emperor
himself, that in such and such a place there were three own brothers,
and with them corn had sprung up for all the world, and so beautiful,
never was the like beheld! The emperor ordered the three brothers to
appear in the imperial presence.
The brothers heard of it, and smacked the tops of their heads with their
hands. "Now it will be amen with us!" They went again to their father.
"Daddy! they tell us to appear before the emperor. Advise us, daddy,
what to do!" "Go, my sons--what will be, will be; and tell the pure
truth before the emperor." The brothers started off and went to the
emperor. The emperor inquired menacingly: "Why, villains, did ye hoard
up corn, when there was such a famine that so many people died of
hunger? Tell the truth; if not I shall order you to be tortured and
racked even unto death." The brothers related all as it had been, from
the beginning to the end. "Now, most gracious emperor, give us over to
any torture whatever, or let thy kindness have compassion on us!" The
emperor's brow became smooth, his eyes became serene. He then ordered
the old father to be brought before him at once, and made him sit beside
him close to his throne, and hearkened to his counsel till death, and
his sons he rewarded handsomely. He ordered the corn to be collected ear
by ear, and to be rubbed out in men's hands; and sent it about for
seed-corn in all empires, and from it was produced holy corn for all the
XVI
THE DUN HORSE[7]
I
Many years ago there lived in the Pawnee tribe an old woman and her
grandson a boy about sixteen years old. These people had no relations
and were very poor. They were so poor that they were despised by the
rest of the tribe. They had nothing of their own; and always, after the
village started to move the camp from one place to another, these two
would stay behind the rest, to look over the old camp and pick up
anything that the other Indians had thrown away as worn out or useless.
In this way they would sometimes get pieces of robes, wornout moccasins
with holes in them, and bits of meat.
Now, it happened one day, after the tribe had moved away from the camp,
that this old woman and her boy were following along the trail behind
the rest, when they came to a miserable old wornout dun horse, which
they supposed had been abandoned by some Indians. He was thin and
exhausted, was blind of one eye, had a bad sore back, and one of his
forelegs was very much swollen. In fact, he was so worthless that none
of the Pawnees had been willing to take the trouble to try to drive him
along with them. But when the old woman and her boy came along, the boy
said, "Come now, we will take this old horse, for we can make him carry
our pack." So the old woman put her pack on the horse, and drove him
along, but he limped and could only go very slowly.
The tribe moved up on the North Platte, until they came to Court House
Rock. The two poor Indians followed them, and camped with the others.
One day while they were here, the young men who had been sent out to
look for buffalo, came hurrying into camp and told the chiefs that a
large herd of buffalo were near, and that among them was a spotted
calf.
The Head Chief of the Pawnees had a very beautiful daughter, and when he
heard about the spotted calf, he ordered his old crier to go about
through the village and call out that the man who killed the spotted
calf should have his daughter for his wife. For a spotted robe is
ti-war'-uks-ti--big medicine.
The buffalo were feeding about four miles from the village, and the
chiefs decided that the charge should be made from there. In this way,
the man who had the fastest horse would be the most likely to kill the
calf. Then all the warriors and the young men picked out their best and
fastest horses, and made ready to start. Among those who prepared for
the charge was the poor boy on the old dun horse. But when they saw him,
all the rich young braves on their fast horses pointed at him and said,
"Oh, see; there is the horse that is going to catch the spotted calf;"
and they laughed at him, so that the poor boy was ashamed, and rode off
to one side of the crowd, where he could not hear their jokes and
laughter.
When he had ridden off some little way the horse stopped and turned his
head round, and spoke to the boy. He said, "Take me down the creek, and
plaster me all over with mud. Cover my head and neck and body and legs."
When the boy heard the horse speak, he was afraid; but he did as he was
told. Then the horse said, "Now mount, but do not ride back to the
warriors, who laugh at you because you have such a poor horse. Stay
right here until the word is given to charge." So the boy stayed there.
And presently all the fine horses were drawn up in line and pranced
about, and were so eager to go that their riders could hardly hold them
in; and at last the old crier gave the word, "Loo-ah!"--Go! Then the
Pawnees all leaned forward on their horses and yelled, and away they
went. Suddenly, away off to the right, was seen the old dun horse. He
did not seem to run. He seemed to sail along like a bird. He passed all
the fastest horses, and in a moment he was among the buffalo. First he
picked out the spotted calf, and charging up alongside of it,
U-ra-rish! straight flew the arrow. The calf fell. The boy drew
another arrow, and killed a fat cow that was running by. Then he
dismounted and began to skin the calf, before any of the other warriors
had come up. But when the rider got off the old dun horse, how changed
he was! He pranced about and would hardly stand still near the dead
buffalo. His back was all right again; his legs were well and fine; and
both his eyes were clear and bright.
The boy skinned the calf and the cow that he had killed, and then he
packed all the meat on the horse, and put the spotted robe on top of the
load, and started back to the camp on foot, leading the dun horse. But
even with this heavy load the horse pranced all the time, and was scared
at everything he saw. On the way to camp, one of the rich young chiefs
of the tribe rode up by the boy and offered him twelve good horses for
the spotted robe, so that he could marry the Head Chief's beautiful
daughter; but the boy laughed at him and would not sell the robe.
Now, while the boy walked to the camp leading the dun horse, most of the
warriors rode back, and one of those that came first to the village went
to the old woman and said to her, "Your grandson has killed the spotted
calf." And the old woman said, "Why do you come to tell me this? You
ought to be ashamed to make fun of my boy, because he is poor." The
warrior said, "What I have told you is true," and then he rode away.
After a little while another brave rode up to the old woman, and said to
her, "Your grandson has killed the spotted calf." Then the old woman
began to cry, she felt so badly because every one made fun of her boy,
because he was poor.
Pretty soon the boy came along, leading the horse up to the lodge where
he and his grandmother lived. It was a little lodge, just big enough for
two, and was made of old pieces of skin that the old woman had picked
up, and was tied together with strings of rawhide and sinew. It was the
meanest and worst lodge in the village. When the old woman saw her boy
leading the dun horse with the load of meat and the robes on it, she was
very surprised. The boy said to her, "Here, I have brought you plenty of
meat to eat, and here is a robe, that you may have for yourself. Take
the meat off the horse." Then the old woman laughed, for her heart was
glad. But when she went to take the meat from the horse's back, he
snorted and jumped about, and acted like a wild horse. The old woman
looked at him in wonder, and could hardly believe that it was the same
horse. So the boy had to take off the meat, for the horse would not let
the old woman come near him.
That night the horse spoke again to the boy and said, "Wa-ti-hes
Chah'-ra-rat wa-ta. Tomorrow the Sioux are coming--a large war party.
They will attack the village, and you will have a great battle. Now,
when the Sioux are all drawn up in line of battle, and are all ready to
fight, you jump on to me, and ride as hard as you can, right into the
middle of the Sioux, and up to their Head Chief, their greatest warrior,
and count coup on him, and kill him, and then ride back. Do this four
times, and count coup on four of the bravest Sioux, and kill them, but
don't go again. If you go the fifth time, maybe you will be killed, or
else you will lose me. La-ku'-ta-chix--remember." So the boy promised.
The next day it happened as the horse had said, and the Sioux came down
and formed in line of battle. Then the boy took his bow and arrows, and
jumped on the dun horse, and charged into the midst of them. And when
the Sioux saw that he was going to strike their Head Chief, they all
shot their arrows at him, and the arrows flew so thickly across each
other that they darkened the sky, but none of them hit the boy. And he
counted coup on the Chief, and killed him, and then rode back. After
that he charged again among the Sioux, where they were gathered
thickest, and counted coup on their bravest warrior, and killed him.
And then twice more, until he had gone four times as the horse had told
But the Sioux and the Pawnees kept on fighting, and the boy stood around
and watched the battle. And at last he said to himself, "I have been
four times and have killed four Sioux, and I am all right, I am not hurt
anywhere; why may I not go again?" So he jumped on the dun horse, and
charged again. But when he got among the Sioux, one Sioux warrior drew
an arrow and shot. The arrow struck the dun horse behind the forelegs
and pierced him through. And the horse fell down dead. But the boy
jumped off, and fought his way through the Sioux, and ran away as fast
as he could to the Pawnees. Now, as soon as the horse was killed, the
Sioux said to each other: "This horse was like a man. He was brave. He
was not like a horse." And they took their knives and hatchets, and
hacked the dun horse and gashed his flesh, and cut him into small
pieces.
The Pawnees and Sioux fought all day long, but toward night the Sioux
broke and fled.
The boy felt very badly that he had lost his horse; and, after the fight
was over, he went out from the village to where it had taken place, to
mourn for his horse. He went to the spot where the horse lay, and
gathered up all the pieces of flesh, which the Sioux had cut off, and
the legs and the hoofs, and put them all together in a pile. Then he
went off to the top of a hill near by, and sat down and drew his robe
over his head, and began to mourn for his horse.
As he sat there, he heard a great wind-storm coming up, and it passed
over him with a loud rushing sound, and after the wind came a rain. The
boy looked down from where he sat to the pile of flesh and bones, which
was all that was left of his horse, and he could just see it through the
rain. And the rain passed by, and his heart was very heavy, and he kept
on mourning.
And pretty soon came another rushing wind, and after it a rain; and as
he looked through the driving rain toward the spot where the pieces lay,
he thought that they seemed to come together and take shape, and that
the pile looked like a horse lying down, but he could not see well for
the thick rain.
After this came a third storm like the others; and now when he looked
toward the horse he thought he saw its tail move from side to side two
or three times, and that it lifted its head from the ground. The boy was
afraid, and wanted to run away, but he stayed.
And as he waited, there came another storm. And while the rain fell,
looking through the rain, the boy saw the horse raise himself up on his
forelegs and look about. Then the dun horse stood up.
The boy left the place where he had been sitting on the hilltop, and
went down to him. When the boy had come near to him, the horse spoke
and said: "You have seen how it has been this day; and from this you may
know how it will be after this. But Ti-ra'-wa has been good, and has
let me come back to you. After this, do what I tell you; not any more,
not any less." Then the horse said: "Now lead me off, far away from the
camp, behind that big hill, and leave me there to-night, and in the
morning come for me;" and the boy did as he was told.
And when he went for the horse in the morning, he found with him a
beautiful white gelding, much more handsome than any horse in the tribe.
That night the dun horse told the boy to take him again to the place
behind the big hill, and to come for him the next morning; and when the
boy went for him again, he found with him a beautiful black gelding. And
so for ten nights, he left the horse among the hills, and each morning
he found a different coloured horse, a bay, a roan, a gray, a blue, a
spotted horse, and all of them finer than any horses that the Pawnees
had ever had in their tribe before.
Now the boy was rich, and he married the beautiful daughter of the Head
Chief, and when he became older he was made Head Chief himself. He had
many children by his beautiful wife, and one day when his oldest boy
died, he wrapped him in the spotted calf robe and buried him in it. He
always took good care of his old grandmother, and kept her in his own
lodge until she died. The dun horse was never ridden except at feasts,
and when they were going to have a doctors' dance, but he was always led
about with the Chief wherever he went. The horse lived in the village
for many years, until he became very old. And at last he died.
[Footnote 7: From "Pawnee Hero Stories and Folk Tales." Copyright, 1890,
by George Bird Grinnell; published by Charles Scribner's Sons.]
XVII
THE GREEDY YOUNGSTER
Once upon a time there were five women who were in a field reaping corn.
None of them had any children, but they were all wishing for a child.
All at once they found a big goose egg, almost as big as a man's head.
"I saw it first," said one. "I saw it just as soon as you did," shouted
another. "But I'll have it," screamed the third, "I saw it first of
all."
Thus they kept on quarrelling and fighting about the egg, and they were
very near tearing each other's hair. But at last they agreed that it
should belong to them all, and that they should sit on it as the geese
do and hatch a gosling. The first woman sat on it for eight days, taking
it very comfortably and doing nothing at all, while the others had to
work hard both for their own and her living. One of the women began to
make some insinuations to her about this.
"Well, I suppose you didn't come out of the egg either before you could
chirp," said the woman who was on the egg, "But I think there is
something in this egg, for I fancy I can hear some one inside grumbling
every other moment: 'Herring and soup! Porridge and milk!' You can come
and sit for eight days now, and then we will sit and work in turn, all
of us."
So when the fifth in turn had sat for eight days, she heard plainly some
one inside the egg screeching for "Herring and soup! Porridge and milk!"
And so she made a hole in it; but instead of a gosling out came a baby,
but it was awfully ugly, and had a big head and a tiny little body. The
first thing it screamed out for, as soon as it put its head outside the
egg, was "Herring and soup! Porridge and milk!" And so they called it
"the greedy youngster."
Ugly as he was, they were fond of him at first; but before long he
became so greedy that he ate up all the meat they had. When they boiled
a dish of soup or a pot of porridge which they thought would be
sufficient for all six, he finished it all by himself. So they would not
have him any longer.
"I have not had a decent meal since this changeling crept out of the
eggshell," said one of them, and when the youngster heard that they were
all of the same opinion, he said he was quite willing to go his way; "if
they did not want him, he was sure he did not want them," and with that
he left the place.
After a long time he came to a farm where the fields were full of
stones, and he went in and asked for a situation. They wanted a labourer
on the farm, and the farmer put him to pick up stones from the field.
Yes, the youngster went to work and picked up the stones, some of which
were so big that they would make many cartloads; but whether they were
big or small, he put them all into his pocket. It did not take him long
to finish that job, so he wanted to know what he should do next.
"You will have to get all the stones out of the field," said the farmer.
"I suppose you can't be ready before you have commenced?"
But the youngster emptied his pockets and threw all the stones in a
heap. Then the farmer saw that he had finished the work, and he thought
he ought to look well after one who was so strong. He must come in and
get something to eat, he said. The youngster thought so too, and he
alone ate what was prepared both for master and servants, and still he
was only half satisfied.
"He is the right sort of man for a labourer, but he is a terrible eater,
to be sure," thought the farmer. "A man like him would eat a poor farmer
out of house and home before anybody knew a word about it," he said. He
had no more work for him; it was best for him to go to the king's
palace.
The youngster set out for the palace, where he got a place at once.
There was plenty of food and plenty of work. He was to be errand boy,
and to help the girls to carry wood and water and do other odd jobs. So
he asked what he was to do first.
"You had better chop some wood in the mean time," they said. Yes, he
commenced to chop and cut wood till the splinters flew about him. It was
not long before he had chopped up everything in the place, both firewood
and timber, both rafters and beams, and when he was ready with it, he
came in and asked what he was to do now.
"You can finish chopping the wood," they said.
"There is no more to chop," he answered.
That could not be possible, thought the overlooker, and had a look into
the wood-shed. But yes, the youngster had chopped up everything; he had
even cut up the timber and planks in the place. This was vexatious, the
overlooker said; and then he told the youngster that he should not taste
food until he had gone into the forest and cut just as much timber as he
had chopped up for firewood.
The youngster went to the smithy and got the smith to help him to make
an axe of five hundredweight of iron, and then he set out for the forest
and began to make a regular clearance, not only of the pine and the
lofty fir trees, but of everything else which was to be found in the
king's forests, and in the neighbours' as well. He did not stop to cut
the branches or the tops off, but he left them lying there as if a
hurricane had blown them down. He put a proper load on the sledge and
put all the horses to it, but they could not even move it; so he took
the horses by the heads to give the sledge a start, but he pulled so
hard that the horses' heads came off. He then turned the horses out of
the shafts and drew the load himself.
When he came to the palace, the king and his overlooker were standing in
the hall to give him a scolding for having destroyed the forest--the
overlooker had been there and seen what he had been doing. But when the
king saw the youngster dragging half the forest after him, he got both
angry and afraid; but he thought he had better be a little careful with
him, since he was strong.
"Well, you are a wonderful workman, to be sure," said the king; "but how
much do you eat at a time, because I suppose you are hungry now?"
Oh, when he was to have a proper meal of porridge, it would take twelve
barrels of meal to make it, thought the youngster; but when he had put
that away, he could wait awhile, of course, for his next meal.
It took some time to boil such a dish of porridge, and meantime he was
to bring in a little firewood for the cook. He put a lot of wood on a
sledge, but when he was coming through the door with it he was a little
rough and careless again. The house got almost out of shape, and all the
joists creaked; he was very near dragging down the whole palace. When
the porridge was nearly ready, they sent him out to call the people home
from the fields. He shouted so that the mountains and hills around rang
with echoes, but the people did not come quick enough for him. He came
to blows with them, and killed twelve of them.
"You have killed twelve men," said the king; "and you eat for many times
twelve; but how many do you work for?"
"For many times twelve as well," answered the youngster.
When he had finished his porridge, he was to go into the barn to thrash.
He took one of the rafters from the roof and made a flail out of it, and
when the roof was about to fall in, he took a big pine tree with
branches and all and put it up instead of the rafter. So he went on
thrashing the grain and the straw and the hay all together. This was
doing more damage than good, for the corn and the chaff flew about
together, and a cloud of dust arose over the whole palace.
When he had nearly finished thrashing, enemies came into the country, as
a war was coming on. So the king told the youngster that he should take
men with him to go and meet the enemy and fight them, for the king
thought they would surely kill him.
No, he would not have any men with him to be cut to pieces; he would
fight by himself, answered the youngster.
"So much the better," thought the king; "the sooner I shall get rid of
him; but he must have a proper club."
They sent for the smith; he forged a club which weighed a hundredweight.
"A very nice thing to crack nuts with," said the youngster. So the smith
made one of three hundredweight. "It would be very well for hammering
nails into boots," was the answer. Well, the smith could not make a
bigger one with the men he had. So the youngster set out for the smithy
himself, and made a club that weighed five tons, and it took a hundred
men to turn it on the anvil. "That one might do for lack of a better,"
thought the youngster. He wanted next a bag with some provisions; they
had to make one out of fifteen oxhides, and they filled it with food,
and away he went down the hill with the bag on his back and the club on
his shoulder.
When he came so far that the enemy saw him, they sent a soldier to ask
him if he was going to fight them.
"Yes; but wait a little till I have had something to eat," said the
youngster. He threw himself down on the grass and began to eat with the
big bag of food in front of him.
But the enemy would not wait, and commenced to fire at him at once, till
it rained and hailed around him with bullets.
"I don't mind these crowberries a bit," said the youngster, and went on
eating harder than ever. Neither lead nor iron took any effect upon him,
and his bag with food in front of him guarded him against the bullets as
if it were a rampart.
So they commenced throwing bomb-shells and firing cannons at him. He
only grinned a little every time he felt them.
"They don't hurt me a bit," he said. But just then he got a bomb-shell
right down his windpipe.
"Fy!" he shouted, and spat it out again; but then a chain-shot made its
way into his butter-can, and another carried away the piece of food he
held between his fingers.
That made him angry; he got up and took his big club and struck the
ground with it, asking them if they wanted to take the food out of his
mouth, and what they meant by blowing crowberries at him with those
pea-shooters of theirs. He then struck the ground again till the hills
and rocks rattled and shook, and sent the enemy flying in the air like
chaff. This finished the war.
When he came home again, and asked for more work, the king was taken
quite aback, for he thought he should have got rid of him in the war. He
knew of nothing else but to send him on a message to the devil.
"You had better go to the devil and ask him for my ground-rent," he
said. The youngster took his bag on his back, and started at once. He
was not long in getting there, but the devil was gone to court, and
there was no one at home but his mother, and she said that she had never
heard talk of any ground-rent. He had better call again another time.
"Yes, call again to-morrow is always the cry," he said; but he was not
going to be made a fool of, he told her. He was there, and there he
would remain till he got the ground-rent. He had plenty of time to wait.
But when he had finished all the food in his bag, the time hung heavy on
his hands, and then he asked the old lady for the ground-rent again.
She had better pay it now, he said.
"No, she was going to do nothing of the sort," she said. Her words were
as firm as the old fir tree just outside the gates, which was so big
that fifteen men could scarcely span it.
But the youngster climbed right up in the top of it and twisted and
turned it as if it was a willow, and then he asked her if she was going
to pay the ground-rent now.
Yes, she dared not do anything else, and scraped together as much money
as he thought he could carry in his bag. He then set out for home with
the ground-rent, but as soon as he was gone the devil came home. When he
heard that the youngster had gone off with his bag full of money, he
first of all gave his mother a hiding, and then he started after him,
thinking he would soon overtake him.
He soon came up to him, for he had nothing to carry, and now and then he
used his wings; but the youngster had, of course, to keep to the ground
with his heavy bag. Just as the devil was at his heels, he began to jump
and run as fast as he could. He kept his club behind him to keep the
devil off, and thus they went along, the youngster holding the handle
and the devil trying to catch hold of the other end of it, till they
came to a deep valley. There the youngster made a jump across from the
top of one hill to the other, and the devil was in such a hurry to
follow him that he ran his head against the club and fell down into the
valley and broke his leg, and there he lay.
"There is the ground-rent," said the youngster when he came to the
palace, and threw the bag with the money to the king with such a crash
that you could hear it all over the hall.
The king thanked him, and appeared to be well pleased, and promised him
good pay and leave of absence if he wished it, but the youngster wanted
only more work.
"What shall I do now?" he said.
As soon as the king had had time to consider, he told him that he must
go to the hill-troll, who had taken his grandfather's sword. The troll
had a castle by the sea, where no one dared to go.
The youngster put some cartloads of food into his bag and set out again.
He travelled both long and far, over woods and hills and wild moors,
till he came to the big mountains where the troll, who had taken the
sword of the king's grandfather, was living.
But the troll seldom came out in the open air, and the mountain was well
closed, so the youngster was not man enough to get inside.
So he joined a gang of quarrymen who were living at a farm on top of the
hill, and who were quarrying stones in the hills about there. They had
never had such help before, for he broke and hammered away at the rocks
till the mountain cracked, and big stones of the size of a house rolled
down the hill. But when he rested to get his dinner, for which he was
going to have one of the cartloads in his bag, he found it was all eaten
up.
"I have generally a good appetite myself," said the youngster; "but the
one who has been here can do a trifle more than I, for he has eaten all
the bones as well."
Thus the first day passed; and he fared no better the second. On the
third day he set out to break stones again, taking with him the third
load of food, but he lay down behind the bag and pretended to be asleep.
All of a sudden, a troll with seven heads came out of the mountain and
began to eat his food.
"It's all ready for me here, and I will eat," said the troll.
"We will see about that," said the youngster, and hit the troll with his
club, so the heads rolled down the hill.
So he went into the mountain which the troll had come out of, and in
there stood a horse eating out of a barrel of glowing cinders, and
behind it stood a barrel of oats.
"Why don't you eat out of the barrel of oats?" asked the youngster.
"Because I cannot turn round," said the horse.
"But I will soon turn you round," said the youngster.
"Rather cut my head off," said the horse.
So he cut its head off, and the horse turned into a fine handsome
fellow. He said he had been bewitched, and taken into the mountain and
turned into a horse by the troll. He then helped the youngster to find
the sword, which the troll had hidden at the bottom of the bed, and in
the bed lay the old mother of the troll, asleep and snoring hard.
So they set out for home by water, but when they had got some distance
out to sea the old mother came after them. As she could not overtake
them, she lay down and began to drink the sea, and she drank till the
water fell; but she could not drink the sea dry, and so she burst.
When they came to land, the youngster sent word that the king must come
and fetch the sword. He sent four horses, but no, they could not move
it; he sent eight, and he sent twelve; but the sword remained where it
was. They were not able to stir it from the spot. But the youngster took
it and carried it up to the palace alone.
The king could not believe his eyes when he saw the youngster back
again. He appeared, however, to be pleased to see him, and promised him
land and riches. When the youngster wanted more work, the king said he
might set out for an enchanted castle he had, where no one dared to
live, and he would have to stop there till he had built a bridge over
the sound, so that people could get across to the castle.
If he was able to do this he would reward him handsomely, yes, he would
even give him his daughter in marriage, said he.
"Well, I think I can do it," said the youngster.
No one had ever got away alive; those who had got as far as the castle,
lay there killed and torn to pieces as small as barley, and the king
thought he should never see him any more if he would go thither.
But the youngster started on his expedition; he took with him the bag of
food, a crooked, twisted block of a fir tree, an axe, a wedge, and some
chips of the fir root, and the small pauper boy at the palace.
When he came to the sound, he found the river full of ice, and the
current ran as strong as in a waterfall; but he stuck his legs to the
bottom of the river and waded until he got safe across.
When he had warmed himself and had something to eat, he wanted to go to
sleep; but before long he heard such a terrible noise, as if they were
turning the castle upside down. The door burst wide open, and he saw
nothing but a gaping jaw extending from the threshold up to the lintel.
"There is a mouthful for you," said the youngster and threw the pauper
boy into the swallow: "taste that! But let me see now who you are!
Perhaps you are an old acquaintance?"
And so it was; it was the devil who was about again.
They began to play cards, for the devil wanted to try and win back some
of the ground-rent which the youngster had got out of his mother by
threats, when he was sent by the king to collect it; but the youngster
was always the fortunate one, for he put a cross on the back of all the
good cards, and when he had won all the money which the devil had upon
him, the devil had to pay him out of the gold and silver which was in
the castle.
Suddenly the fire went out, so they could not tell the one card from the
other.
"We must chop some wood now," said the youngster, who drove the axe into
the fir block, and forced the wedge in; but the twisted, knotty block
would not split, although the youngster worked as hard as he could with
the axe.
"They say you are strong," he said to the devil; "just spit on your
hands, stick your claws in, and tear away, and let me see what you are
made of."
The devil did so, and put both his fists into the split and pulled as
hard as he could, when the youngster suddenly struck the wedge out, and
the devil stuck fast in the block and the youngster let him also have a
taste of the butt end of his axe on his back. The devil begged and
prayed so nicely to be let loose, but the youngster would not listen to
anything of the kind unless he promised that he would never come there
any more and create any disturbance. He also had to promise that he
would build a bridge over the sound, so that people could pass over it
at all times of the year, and it should be ready when the ice was gone.
"They are very hard conditions," said the devil; but there was no other
way out of it--if the devil wanted to be set free, he would have to
promise it. He bargained, however, that he should have the first soul
that went across the bridge. That was to be the toll.
Yes, he should have that, said the youngster. So the devil was let
loose, and he started home. But the youngster lay down to sleep, and
slept till far into the day.
When the king came to see if he was cut and chopped into small pieces,
he had to wade through all the money before he came to his bedside.
There was money in heaps and in bags which reached far up the wall, and
the youngster lay in bed asleep and snoring hard.
"Lord help me and my daughter," said the king when he saw that the
youngster was alive. Well, all was good and well done, that no one could
deny; but there was no hurry talking of the wedding before the bridge
was ready.
One day the bridge stood ready, and the devil was there waiting for the
toll which he had bargained for.
The youngster wanted the king to go with him and try the bridge, but the
king had no mind to do it. So he mounted a horse himself, and put the
fat dairy-maid in the palace on the pommel in front of him; she looked
almost like a big fir block, and so he rode over the bridge, which
thundered under the horse's feet.
"Where is the toll? Where have you got the soul?" cried the devil.
"Why, inside this fir block," said the youngster; "if you want it you
will have to spit in your hands and take it."
"No, many thanks! If she does not come to me, I am sure I shan't take
her," said the devil. "You got me once into a pinch, and I'll take care
you don't get me into another," and with that he flew straight home to
his old mother, and since that time he has never been heard or seen
thereabouts.
The youngster went home to the palace and asked for the reward the king
had promised him, and when the king wanted to get out of it, and would
not stick to what he had promised, the youngster said it was best he got
a good bag of food ready for him and he would take his reward himself.
Yes, the king would see to that, and when the bag was ready the
youngster asked the king to come outside the door. The youngster then
gave the king such a kick, which sent him flying up in the air. The bag
he threw after him that he might not be without food; and if he has not
come down again by this he is floating about with his bag between heaven
and earth to this very day.
XVIII
HANS, WHO MADE THE PRINCESS LAUGH
Once upon a time there was a king, who had a daughter, and she was so
lovely that the reports of her beauty went far and wide; but she was so
melancholy that she never laughed, and besides she was so grand and
proud that she said "No" to all who came to woo her--she would not have
any of them, were they ever so fine, whether they were princes or
noblemen.
The king was tired of this whim of hers long ago, and thought she ought
to get married like other people; there was nothing she need wait
for--she was old enough and she would not be any richer either, for she
was to have half the kingdom, which she inherited after her mother.
So he made known every Sunday after the service, from the steps outside
the church, that he that could make his daughter laugh should have both
her and half the kingdom. But if there were any one who tried and could
not make her laugh, he would have three red stripes cut out of his back
and salt rubbed into them--and, sad to relate, there were many sore
backs in that kingdom. Lovers from south and from north, from east and
from west, came to try their luck--they thought it was an easy thing to
make a princess laugh. They were a queer lot altogether, but for all
their cleverness and for all the tricks and pranks they played, the
princess was just as serious and immovable as ever.
But close to the palace lived a man who had three sons, and they had
also heard that the king had made known that he who could make the
princess laugh should have her and half the kingdom.
The eldest of the brothers wanted to try first, and away he went; and
when he came to the palace, he told the king he wouldn't mind trying to
make the princess laugh.
"Yes, yes! that's all very well," said the king; "but I am afraid it's
of very little use, my man. There have been many here to try their luck,
but my daughter is just as sad, and I am afraid it is no good trying. I
do not like to see any more suffer on that account."
But the lad thought he would try anyhow. It couldn't be such a difficult
thing to make a princess laugh at him, for had not everybody, both grand
and simple, laughed so many a time at him when he served as soldier and
went through his drill under Sergeant Nils.
So he went out on the terrace outside the princess's windows and began
drilling just as if Sergeant Nils himself were there. But all in vain!
The princess sat just as serious and immovable as before, and so they
took him and cut three broad, red stripes out of his back and sent him
He had no sooner arrived home than his second brother wanted to set out
and try his luck. He was a schoolmaster, and a funny figure he was
altogether. He had one leg shorter than the other, and limped terribly
when he walked. One moment he was no bigger than a boy, but the next
moment when he raised himself up on his long leg he was as big and tall
as a giant--and besides he was great at preaching.
When he came to the palace, and said that he wanted to make the princess
laugh, the king thought that it was not so unlikely that he might; "but
I pity you, if you don't succeed," said the king, "for we cut the
stripes broader and broader for every one that tries."
So the schoolmaster went out on the terrace, and took his place outside
the princess's window, where he began preaching and chanting imitating
seven of the parsons, and reading and singing just like seven of the
clerks whom they had had in the parish.
The king laughed at the schoolmaster till he was obliged to hold on to
the door-post, and the princess was just on the point of smiling, but
suddenly she was as sad and immovable as ever, and so it fared no better
with Paul the schoolmaster than with Peter the soldier--for Peter and
Paul were their names, you must know!
So they took Paul and cut three red stripes out of his back, put salt
into them, and sent him home again.
Well, the youngest brother thought he would have a try next. His name
was Hans. But the brothers laughed and made fun of him, and showed him
their sore backs. Besides, the father would not give him leave to go,
for he said it was no use his trying, who had so little sense; all he
could do was to sit in a corner on the hearth, like a cat, rooting about
in the ashes and cutting chips. But Hans would not give in--he begged
and prayed so long, till they got tired of his whimpering, and so he got
leave to go to the king's palace and try his luck.
When he arrived at the palace he did not say he had come to try to make
the princess laugh, but asked if he could get a situation there. No,
they had no situation for him; but Hans was not so easily put off--they
might want one to carry wood and water for the kitchenmaid in such a big
place as that, he said. Yes, the king thought so too, and to get rid of
the lad he gave him leave to remain there and carry wood and water for
the kitchenmaid.
One day, when he was going to fetch water from the brook, he saw a big
fish in the water just under an old root of a fir-tree, which the
current had carried all the soil away from. He put his bucket quietly
under the fish and caught it. As he was going home to the palace, he met
an old woman leading a golden goose.
"Good day, grandmother!" said Hans. "That's a fine bird you have got
there; and such splendid feathers too! he shines a long way off. If one
had such feathers, one needn't be chopping firewood."
The woman thought just as much of the fish which Hans had in the bucket,
and said if Hans would give her the fish he should have the golden
goose; and this goose was such that if any one touched it he would be
sticking fast to it if he only said: "If you'll come along, then hang
on."
Yes, Hans would willingly exchange on those terms. "A bird is as good as
a fish any day," he said to himself. "If it is as you say, I might use
it instead of a fish-hook," he said to the woman, and felt greatly
pleased with the possession of the goose.
He had not gone far before he met another old woman. When she saw the
splendid golden goose, she must go and stroke it. She made herself so
friendly and spoke so nicely to Hans, and asked him to let her stroke
that lovely golden goose of his.
"Oh, yes!" said Hans, "but you mustn't pluck off any of its feathers!"
Just as she stroked the bird, Hans said: "If you'll come along, then
hang on!"
The woman pulled and tore, but she had to hang on, whether she would or
no, and Hans walked on, as if he only had the goose with him.
When he had gone some distance, he met a man who had a spite against the
woman for a trick she had played upon him. When he saw that she fought
so hard to get free and seemed to hang on so fast, he thought he might
safely venture to pay her off for the grudge he owed her, and so he gave
her a kick.
"If you'll come along, then hang on!" said Hans, and the man had to hang
on and limp along on one leg, whether he would or no; and when he tried
to tear himself loose, he made it still worse for himself, for he was
very nearly falling on his back whenever he struggled to get free.
So on they went till they came in the neighborhood of the palace. There
they met the king's smith; he was on his way to the smithy, and had a
large pair of tongs in his hand. This smith was a merry fellow, and was
always full of mad pranks and tricks, and when he saw this procession
coming jumping and limping along, he began laughing till he was bent in
two, but suddenly he said:
"This must be a new flock of geese for the princess: but who can tell
which is goose and which is gander? I suppose it must be the gander
toddling on in front. Goosey, goosey!" he called, and pretended to be
strewing corn out of his hands as when feeding geese.
But they did not stop. The woman and the man only looked in great rage
at the smith for making game of them. So said the smith: "It would be
great fun to see if I could stop the whole flock, many as they are!"--He
was a strong man, and seized the old man with his tongs from behind in
his trousers, and the man shouted and struggled hard, but Hans said:
"If you'll come along, then hang on!"
And so the smith had to hang on too. He bent his back and stuck his
heels in the ground when they went up a hill and tried to get away, but
it was of no use; he stuck on to the other as if he had been screwed
fast in the great vise in the smithy, and whether he liked it or not, he
had to dance along with the others.
When they came near the palace, the farm-dog ran against them and barked
at them, as if they were a gang of tramps, and when the princess came to
look out of her window to see what was the matter, and saw this
procession, she burst out laughing. But Hans was not satisfied with
that. "Just wait a bit, and she will laugh still louder very soon," he
said, and made a tour round the palace with his followers.
When they came past the kitchen, the door was open and the cook was just
boiling porridge, but when she saw Hans and his train after him, she
rushed out of the door with the porridge-stick in one hand and a big
ladle full of boiling porridge in the other, and she laughed till her
sides shook; but when she saw the smith there as well, she thought she
would have burst with laughter. When she had had a regular good laugh,
she looked at the golden goose again and thought it was so lovely that
she must stroke it.
"Hans, Hans!" she cried, and ran after him with the ladle in her hand;
"just let me stroke that lovely bird of yours."
"Rather let her stroke me!" said the smith.
"Very well," said Hans.
But when the cook heard this, she got very angry. "What is it you say!"
she cried, and gave the smith a smack with the ladle.
"If you'll come along, then hang on!" said Hans, and so she stuck fast
to the others too, and for all her scolding and all her tearing and
pulling, she had to limp along with them.
And when they came past the princess's window again, she was still there
waiting for them, but when she saw that they had got hold of the cook
too, with the ladle and porridge-stick, she laughed till the king had to
hold her up. So Hans got the princess and half the kingdom, and they had
a wedding which was heard of far and wide.
XIX
THE STORY OF TOM TIT TOT[8]
Well, once upon a time there were a woman, and she baked five pies. And
when they come out of the oven, they was that overbaked the crust were
too hard to eat. So she says to her darter:
"Darter," says she, "put you them there pies on the shelf an' leave 'em
there a little, an' they'll come agin--" She meant, you know, the crust
'ud get soft.
But the gal, she says to herself, "Well, if they'll come agin, I'll ate
'em now." And she set to work and ate 'em all, first and last.
Well, come supper time, the woman she said, "Goo you and git one o' them
there pies; I daresay they've come agin, now."
The gal, she went an' she looked, and there warn't nothin' but the
dishes. So back she come and says she, "Noo, they ain't come agin."
"Not none on 'em?" says the mother.
"Not none on 'em," says she.
"Well, come agin, or not come agin," says the woman, "I'll ha' one for
supper."
"But you can't, if they ain't come," says the gal.
"But I can," says she. "Goo you and bring the best of 'em."
"Best or worst," says the gal, "I've ate 'em all, and you can't ha' one
till that's come agin."
Well, the woman she were wholly bate, and she took her spinnin' to the
door to spin, and as she span she sang:
    "My darter ha' ate five, five pies to-day--
     My darter ha' ate five, five pies to-day."
The king, he were a comin' down the street and he hard her sing, but
what she sang he couldn't hare, so he stopped and said:
"What were that you was a singin of, woman?"
The woman, she were ashamed to let him hare what her darter had been
a-doin', so she sang, 'stids o' that:
    "My darter ha' spun five, five skeins to-day--
     My darter ha' spun five, five skeins to-day."
"S'ars o' mine!" said the king, "I never heerd tell of any one as could
do that."
Then he said: "Look you here, I want a wife, and I'll marry your darter.
But look you here," says he, "'leven months out o' the year she shall
have all the vittles she likes to eat, and all the gownds she likes to
git, and all the cumpny she likes to hev; but the last month o' the year
she'll ha' to spin five skeins iv'ry day, an' if she doon't, I shall
kill her."
"All right," says the woman; for she thowt what a grand marriage that
was. And as for them five skeins, when te come tew, there'd be plenty o'
ways of gettin' out of it, and likeliest, he'd ha' forgot about it.
Well, so they were married. An' for 'leven months the gal had all the
vittles she liked to ate, and all the gownds she liked to git, and all
the cumpny she liked to have.
But when the time was gettin' oover, she began to think about them there
skeins an' to wonder if he had 'em in mind. But not one word did he say
about 'em, an' she whoolly thowt he'd forgot 'em.
Howsivir, the last day o' the last month, he takes her to a room she'd
niver set eyes on afore. There worn't nothin' in it but a spinnin' wheel
and a stool. An' says he, "Now, me dear, hare you'll be shut in
to-morrow with some vittles and some flax, and if you hain't spun five
skeins by the night, yar hid'll goo off."
An' awa' he went about his business.
Well, she were that frightened. She'd allus been such a gatless gal,
that she didn't se much as know how to spin, an' what were she to dew
to-morrer, with no one to come nigh her to help her? She sat down on a
stool in the kitchen, and lork! how she did cry!
Howsivir, all on a sudden she hard a sort of a knockin' low down on the
door. She upped and oped it, an' what should she see but a small little
black thing with a long tail. That looked up at her right kewrious, an'
that said:
"What are yew a-cryin' for?"
"Wha's that to yew?" says she.
"Niver yew mind," that said, "but tell me what you're a cryin' for."
"That oon't dew me noo good if I dew," says she.
"Yew doon't know that," that said, an' twirled that's tail round.
"Well," says she, "that oon't dew no harm, if that doon't dew no good,"
and she upped and told about the pies an' the skeins an' everything.
"This is what I'll dew," says the little black thing: "I'll come to yar
winder iv'ry mornin' an' take the flax an' bring it spun at night"
"What's your pay?" says she.
That looked out o' the corners o' that's eyes an' that said: "I'll give
you three guesses every night to guess my name, an' if you hain't
guessed it afore the month's up, yew shall be mine."
Well, she thowt she'd be sure to guess that's name afore the month was
up. "All right," says she, "I agree."
"All right," that says, an' lork! how that twirled that's tail.
Well, the next day, har husband, he took her inter the room, an' there
was the flax an' the day's vittles.
"Now, there's the flax," says he, "an' if that ain't spun up this night,
off goo yar hid." An' then he went out an' locked the door.
He'd hardly goon, when there was a knockin' agin the winder.
She upped and she oped it, and there sure enough was the little oo'd
thing a settin' on the ledge.
"Where's the flax?" says he.
"Here te be," says she. And she gonned it to him.
Well, come the evenin', a knockin' come agin to the winder. She upped
an' she oped it, and there were the little oo'd thing, with five skeins
of flax on his arm.
"Here te be," says he, an' he gonned it to her.
"Now, what's my name?" says he.
"What, is that Bill?" says she.
"Noo, that ain't," says he. An' he twirled his tail.
"Is that Ned?" says she.
"Well, is that Mark?" says she.
"Noo, that ain't," says he. An' he twirled his tail harder, an' awa' he
flew.
Well, when har husban' he come in, there was the five skeins riddy for
"I see I shorn't hev for to kill you to-night, me dare," says he.
"You'll hev yar vittles and yar flax in the mornin'," says he, an' away
he goes.
Well, ivery day the flax an' the vittles, they was browt, an' ivery day
that there little black impet used for to come mornin's and evenin's.
An' all the day the darter, she set a tryin' fur to think of names to
say to it when te come at night. But she niver hot on the right one. An'
as that got to-warts the ind o' the month, the impet that began for to
look soo maliceful, an' that twirled that's tail faster an' faster each
time she gave a guess.
At last te came to the last day but one. The impet that come at night
along o' the five skeins, an' that said:
"What, hain't yew got my name yet?"
"Is that Nicodemus?" says she.
"Noo, t'ain't," that says.
"Is that Sammle?" says she.
"A-well, is that Methusalem?" says she.
"Noo, t'ain't that norther," he says.
Then that looks at her with that's eyes like a cool o' fire, an that
says, "Woman, there's only to-morrer night, an' then yar'll be mine!"
An' away te flew.
Well, she felt that horrud. Howsomediver, she hard the king a-comin'
along the passage. In he came, an' when he see the five skeins, he says,
says he:
"Well, me dare," says he, "I don't see but what yew'll ha' your skeins
ready to-morrer night as well, an' as I reckon I shorn't ha' to kill
you, I'll ha' supper in here to-night." So they brought supper an'
another stool for him, and down the tew they sot.
Well, he hadn't eat but a mouthful or so, when he stops and begins to
laugh.
"What is it?" says she.
"A-why," says he, "I was out a-huntin' to-day, an' I got away to a place
in the wood I'd never seen afore. An' there was an old chalk pit. An' I
heerd a sort of a hummin', kind o'. So I got off my hobby, an' I went
right quiet to the pit, an' I looked down. Well, what should there be
but the funniest little black thing yew iver set eyes on. An' what was
that a dewin' on, but that had a little spinnin' wheel, an' that were
a-spinnin' wonnerful fast, an' a-twirlin' that's tail. An' as that span,
that sang:
    "Nimmy, nimmy not,
     My name's Tom Tit Tot."
Well, when the darter heerd this, she fared as if she could ha' jumped
outer her skin for joy, but she di'n't say a word.
Next day, that there little thing looked soo maliceful when he come for
the flax. An' when night came, she heerd that a-knockin' agin the winder
panes. She oped the winder, an' that come right in on the ledge. That
were grinnin' from are to are, an' Oo! tha's tail were twirlin' round so
fast.
"What's my name?" that says, as that gonned her the skeins.
"Is that Solomon?" she says, pretendin' to be a-feard.
"Noo, tain't," that says, an' that come fudder inter the room.
"Well, is that Zebedee?" says she agin.
"Noo, tain't," says the impet. An' then that laughed an' twirled that's
tail till yew cou'n't hardly see it.
"Take time, woman," that says; "next guess, an' you're mine." An' that
stretched out that's black hands at her.
Well, she backed a step or two, an' she looked at it, and then she
laughed out, an' says she, a pointin' of her finger at it:
     Yar name's Tom Tit Tot."
Well, when that hard her, that shruck awful an' awa' that flew into the
dark, an' she niver saw it noo more.
[Footnote 8: An old Suffolk tale, given in the dialect of East Anglia.]
XX
THE PEASANT STORY OF NAPOLEON
     [Goguelet, an old soldier who fought under Napoleon, tells the
     story of his wonderful General and Emperor to a group of eager
     listeners in the country doctor's barn.]
You see, my friends, Napoleon was born in Corsica, a French island,
warmed by the sun of Italy, where it is like a furnace, and where the
people kill each other, from father to son, all about nothing: that's a
way they have. To begin with the marvel of the thing--his mother, who
was the handsomest woman of her time, and a knowing one, bethought
herself of dedicating him to God, so that he might escape the dangers of
his childhood and future life; for she had dreamed that the world was
set on fire the day he was born. And, indeed, it was a prophecy! So she
asked God to protect him, on condition that Napoleon should restore His
holy religion, which was then cast to the ground. Well, that was agreed
upon, and we shall see what came of it.
"Follow me closely, and tell me if what you hear is in the nature or
"Sure and certain it is that none but a man who conceived the idea of
making a compact with God could have passed unhurt through the enemy's
lines, through cannon-balls, and discharges of grape-shot that swept the
rest of us off like flies, and always respected his head. I had proof of
that--I myself--at Eylau. I see him now, as he rode up a height, took
his field-glass, looked at the battle, and said, 'All goes well.' One of
those plumed busybodies, who plagued him considerably and followed him
everywhere, even to his meals, so they said, thought to play the wag,
and took the Emperor's place as he rode away. Ho! in a twinkling, head
and plume were off! You must understand that Napoleon had promised to
keep the secret of his compact all to himself. That's why all those who
followed him, even his nearest friends, fell like nuts--Duroc,
Bessières, Lannes--all strong as steel bars, though he could bend them
as he pleased. Besides--to prove he was the child of God, and made to be
the father of soldiers--was he ever known to be lieutenant or captain?
No, no; commander-in-chief from the start. He didn't look to be more
than twenty-four years of age when he was an old general at the taking
of Toulon, where he first began to show the others that they knew
nothing about manoeuvring cannon.
"After that, down came our slip of a general to command the grand army
of Italy, which hadn't bread, nor munitions, nor shoes, nor coats--a
poor army, as naked as a worm. 'My friends,' said he, 'here we are
together. Get it into your pates that fifteen days from now you will be
conquerors--new clothes, good gaiters, famous shoes, and every man with
a great-coat; but, my children, to get these things you must march to
Milan, where they are.' And we marched. France, crushed as flat as a
bed-bug, straightened up. We were thirty thousand bare-feet against
eighty thousand Austrian bullies, all fine men, well set-up. I see 'em
now! But Napoleon--he was then only Bonaparte--he knew how to put the
courage into us! We marched by night, and we marched by day; we slapped
their faces at Montenotte, we thrashed them at Rivoli, Lodi, Arcole,
Millesimo, and we never let 'em up. A soldier gets the taste of
conquest. So Napoleon whirled round those Austrian generals, who didn't
know where to poke themselves to get out of his way, and he pelted 'em
well--nipped off ten thousand men at a blow sometimes, by getting round
them with fifteen hundred Frenchmen, and then he gleaned as he pleased.
He took their cannon, their supplies, their money, their munitions, in
short, all they had that was good to take. He fought them and beat them
on the mountains, he drove them into the rivers and seas, he bit 'em in
the air, he devoured 'em on the ground, and he lashed 'em everywhere.
Hey! the grand army feathered itself well; for, d'ye see the Emperor,
who was a wit, called up the inhabitants and told them he was there to
deliver them. So after that the natives lodged and cherished us; the
women too, and very judicious they were. Now here's the end of it. In
Ventose, '96--in those times that was the month of March of to-day--we
lay cuddled in a corner of Savoie with the marmots; and yet, before that
campaign was over, we were masters of Italy, just as Napoleon had
predicted; and by the following March--in a single year and two
campaigns--he had brought us within sight of Vienna. 'Twas a clean
sweep. We devoured their armies, one after the other, and made an end of
four Austrian generals. One old fellow, with white hair, was roasted
like a rat in the straw at Mantua. Kings begged for mercy on their
knees! Peace was won.
"Could a man have done that? No; God helped him, to a certainty!
"He divided himself up like the loaves in the Gospel, commanded the
battle by day, planned it by night; going and coming, for the sentinels
saw him--never eating, never sleeping. So, seeing these prodigies, the
soldiers adopted him for their father. Forward, march! Then those
others, the rulers in Paris, seeing this, said to themselves: 'Here's a
bold one that seems to get his orders from the skies; he's likely to put
his paw on France. We must let him loose on Asia; we will send him to
America, perhaps that will satisfy him.' But 't was written above for
him, as it was for Jesus Christ. The command went forth that he should
go to Egypt. See, again, his resemblance to the Son of God. But that's
not all. He called together his best veterans, his fire-eaters, the ones
he had particularly put the devil into, and he said to them like this:
'My friends, they have given us Egypt to chew up, just to keep us busy,
but we'll swallow it whole in a couple of campaigns, as we did Italy.
The common soldiers shall be princes and have the land for their own.
Forward, march!' 'Forward, march!' cried the sergeants, and there we
were at Toulon, road to Egypt. At that time the English had all their
ships in the sea; but when we embarked, Napoleon said: 'They won't see
us. It is just as well that you should know from this time forth that
your general has got his star in the sky, which guides and protects us.'
What was said was done. Passing over the sea, we took Malta like an
orange, just to quench his thirst for victory; for he was a man who
couldn't live and do nothing.
"So here we are in Egypt. Good. Once here, other orders. The Egyptians,
d'ye see, are men who, ever since the earth was, have had giants for
sovereigns, and armies as numerous as ants; for, you must understand,
that's the land of genii and crocodiles, where they've built pyramids as
big as our mountains, and buried their kings under them to keep them
fresh--an idea that pleased 'em mightily. So then, after we
disembarked, the Little Corporal said to us: 'My children, the country
you are going to conquer has a lot of gods that you must respect;
because Frenchmen ought to be friends with everybody, and fight the
nations without vexing the inhabitants. Get it into your skulls that you
are not to touch anything at first, for it is all going to be yours
soon. Forward, march!' So far, so good. But all those people of Africa,
to whom Napoleon was foretold under the name of Kébir-Bonaberdis--a word
of their lingo that means 'the sultan fires'--were afraid as the devil
of him. So the Grand Turk, and Asia, and Africa had recourse to magic.
They sent us a demon, named the Mahdi, supposed to have descended from
heaven on a white horse, which, like its master, was bullet-proof; and
both of them lived on air, without food to support them. There are some
that say they saw them; but I can't give you any reasons to make you
certain about that. The rulers of Arabia and the Mamelukes tried to make
their troopers believe that the Mahdi could keep them from perishing in
battle; and they pretended he was an angel sent from heaven to fight
Napoleon and get back Solomon's seal. Solomon's seal was part of their
paraphernalia which they vowed our general had stolen. You must
understand that we'd given 'em a good many wry faces, in spite of what
he had said to us.
"Now, tell me how they knew that Napoleon had a pact with God? Was that
natural, d'ye think?
"They held to it in their minds that Napoleon commanded the genii, and
could pass hither and thither in the twinkling of an eye, like a bird.
The fact is, he was everywhere. At last, it came to his carrying off a
queen beautiful as the dawn, for whom he had offered all his treasure,
and diamonds as big as pigeon's eggs--a bargain which the Mameluke to
whom she particularly belonged positively refused, although he had
several others. Such matters when they come to that pass, can't be
settled without a great many battles; and, indeed, there was no scarcity
of battles; there was fighting enough to please everybody. We were in
line at Alexandria, at Gizeh, and before the Pyramids; we marched in the
sun and through the sand, where some, who had the dazzles, saw water
that they couldn't drink, and shade where their flesh was roasted. But
we made short work of the Mamelukes; and everybody else yielded at the
voice of Napoleon, who took possession of Upper and Lower Egypt, Arabia,
and even the capitals of kingdoms that were no more, where there were
thousands of statues and all the plagues of Egypt, more particularly
lizards--a mammoth of a country where everybody could take his acres of
land for as little as he pleased. Well, while Napoleon was busy with his
affairs inland--where he had it in his head to do fine things--the
English burned his fleet at Aboukir; for they were always looking about
them to annoy us. But Napoleon, who had the respect of the East and of
the West, whom the Pope called his son, and the cousin of Mohammed
called 'his dear father,' resolved to punish England, and get hold of
India in exchange for his fleet. He was just about to take us across the
Red Sea into Asia, a country where there are diamonds and gold to pay
the soldiers and palaces for bivouacs, when the Mahdi made a treaty with
the plague, and sent it down to hinder our victories. Halt! The army to
a man defiled at that parade; and few they were who came back on their
feet. Dying soldiers couldn't take Saint-Jean d'Acre, though they rushed
at it three times with generous and martial obstinacy. The Plague was
the strongest. No saying to that enemy, 'My good friend.' Every soldier
lay ill. Napoleon alone was fresh as a rose, and the whole army saw him
drinking in pestilence without its doing him a bit of harm.
"Ha! my friends! will you tell me that that's in the nature of a mere
man?
"The Mamelukes, knowing we were all in the ambulances, thought they
could stop the way; but that sort of joke wouldn't do with Napoleon. So
he said to his demons, his veterans, those that had the toughest hide,
'Go, clear me the way.' Junot, a sabre of the first cut, and his
particular friend, took a thousand men, no more, and ripped up the army
of the pacha who had had the presumption to put himself in the way.
After that, we came back to headquarters at Cairo. Now, here's another
side of the story. Napoleon absent, France was letting herself be ruined
by the rulers in Paris, who kept back the pay of the soldiers of the
other armies, and their clothing, and their rations; left them to die
of hunger, and expected them to lay down the law to the universe
without taking any trouble to help them. Idiots! who amused themselves
by chattering, instead of putting their own hands in the dough. Well,
that's how it happened that our armies were beaten, and the frontiers of
France were encroached upon: THE MAN was nor there. Now observe, I say
man because that's what they called him; but 'twas nonsense, for he
had a star and all its belongings; it was we who were only men. He
taught history to France after his famous battle of Aboukir, where,
without losing more than three hundred men, and with a single division,
he vanquished the grand army of the Turk, seventy-five thousand strong,
and hustled more than half of it into the sea, r-r-rah!
"That was his last thunder-clap in Egypt. He said to himself, seeing the
way things were going in Paris, 'I am the saviour of France; I know it,
and I must go.' But, understand me, the army didn't know he was going,
or they'd have kept him by force and made him Emperor of the East. So
now we were sad; for He was gone who was all our joy. He left the
command to Kléber, a big mastiff, who came off duty at Cairo,
assassinated by an Egyptian, whom they put to death by empaling him on a
bayonet; that's the way they guillotine people down there. But it makes
'em suffer so much that a soldier had pity on the criminal and gave him
his canteen; and then, as soon as the Egyptian had drunk his fill, he
gave up the ghost with all the pleasure in life. But that's a trifle we
couldn't laugh at then. Napoleon embarked in a cockleshell, a little
skiff that was nothing at all, though 'twas called 'Fortune;' and in a
twinkling, under the nose of England, who was blockading him with ships
of the line, frigates, and anything that could hoist a sail, he crossed
over, and there he was in France. For he always had the power, mind you,
of crossing the seas at one straddle.
"Was that a human man? Bah!
"So, one minute he is at Fréjus, the next in Paris. There, they all
adore him; but he summons the government. 'What have you done with my
children, the soldiers?' he says to the lawyers. 'You're a mob of
rascally scribblers; you are making France a mess of pottage, and
snapping your fingers at what people think of you. It won't do; and I
speak the opinion of everybody.' So, on that, they wanted to battle
with him and kill him--click! he had 'em locked up in barracks, or
flying out of windows, or drafted among his followers, where they were
as mute as fishes and as pliable as a quid of tobacco. After that
stroke--consul! And then, as it was not for him to doubt the Supreme
Being, he fulfilled his promise to the good God, who, you see, had kept
His word to him. He gave Him back His churches, and reestablished His
religion; the bells rang for God and for him: and lo! everybody was
pleased; primo, the priests, whom he saved from being harassed;
secundo, the bourgeois, who thought only of their trade, and no longer
had to fear the rapiamus of the law, which had got to be unjust;
tertio, the nobles, for he forbade they should be killed, as,
unfortunately, the people had got the habit of doing.
"But he still had the Enemy to wipe out; and he wasn't the man to go to
sleep at a mess-table, because, d'ye see, his eye looked over the whole
earth as if it were no bigger than a man's head. So then he appeared in
Italy, like as though he had stuck his head through the window. One
glance was enough. The Austrians were swallowed up at Marengo like so
many gudgeons by a whale! Ouf! The French eagles sang their pæans so
loud that all the world heard them--and it sufficed! 'We won't play that
game any more,' said the German. 'Enough, enough!' said all the rest. To
sum up: Europe backed down, England knocked under. General peace; and
the kings and the peoples made believe kiss each other. That's the time
when the Emperor invented the Legion of Honour--and a fine thing, too.
'In France'--this is what he said at Boulogne before the whole
army--'every man is brave. So the citizen who does a fine action shall
be sister to the soldier, and the soldier shall be his brother, and the
two shall be one under the flag of honour.'
"We, who were down in Egypt, now came home. All was changed! He left us
general, and hey! in a twinkling we found him EMPEROR. France gave
herself to him, like a fine girl to a lancer. When it was done--to the
satisfaction of all, as you may say--a sacred ceremony took place, the
like of which was never seen under the canopy of the skies. The Pope and
the cardinals, in their red and gold vestments, crossed the Alps
expressly to crown him before the army and the people, who clapped
their hands. There is one thing that I should do very wrong not to tell
you. In Egypt, in the desert close to Syria, the RED MAN came to him on
the Mount of Moses, and said, 'All is well.' Then, at Marengo, the night
before the victory, the same Red Man appeared before him for the second
time, standing erect and saying: 'Thou shalt see the world at thy feet;
thou shalt be Emperor of France, King of Italy, master of Holland,
sovereign of Spain, Portugal, and the Illyrian provinces, protector of
Germany, saviour of Poland, first eagle of the Legion of Honour--all.'
This Red Man, you understand, was his genius, his spirit--a sort of
satellite who served him, as some say, to communicate with his star. I
never really believed that. But the Red Man himself is a true fact.
Napoleon spoke of him, and said he came to him in troubled moments, and
lived in the palace of the Tuileries under the roof. So, on the day of
the coronation, Napoleon saw him for the third time; and they were in
consultation over many things.
"After that, Napoleon went to Milan to be crowned king of Italy, and
there the grand triumph of the soldier began. Every man who could write
was made an officer. Down came pensions; it rained duchies; treasures
poured in for the staff which didn't cost France a penny; and the Legion
of Honour provided incomes for the private soldiers--of which I receive
mine to this day. So here were the armies maintained as never before on
this earth. But besides that, the Emperor, knowing that he was to be the
emperor of the whole world, bethought him of the bourgeois, and to
please them he built fairy monuments, after their own ideas, in places
where you'd never think to find any. For instance, suppose you were
coming back from Spain and going to Berlin--well, you'd find triumphal
arches along the way, with common soldiers sculptured on the stone,
every bit the same as generals. In two or three years, and without
imposing taxes on any of you, Napoleon filled his vaults with gold,
built palaces, made bridges, roads, scholars, fêtes, laws, vessels,
harbours, and spent millions upon millions--such enormous sums that he
could, so they tell me, have paved France from end to end with
five-franc pieces, if he had had a mind to.
"Now, when he sat at ease on his throne, and was master of all, so that
Europe waited his permission to do his bidding, he remembered his four
brothers and his three sisters, and he said to us, as it might be in
conversation, in an order of the day, 'My children, is it right that the
blood relations of your Emperor should be begging their bread? No. I
wish to see them in splendour like myself. It becomes, therefore,
absolutely necessary to conquer a kingdom for each of them--to the end
that Frenchmen may be masters over all lands, that the soldiers of the
Guard shall make the whole earth tremble, that France may spit where she
likes, and that all the nations shall say to her, as it is written on my
copper coins, 'God protects you!' 'Agreed!' cried the army. 'We'll go
fish for thy kingdoms with our bayonets.' Ha! there was no backing down,
don't you see! If he had taken it into his head to conquer the moon, we
should have made ready, packed knapsacks, and clambered up; happily, he
didn't think of it. The kings of the countries, who liked their
comfortable thrones, were, naturally, loath to budge, and had to have
their ears pulled; so then--Forward, march! We did march; we got there;
and the earth once more trembled to its centre. Hey! the men and the
shoes he used up in those days! The enemy dealt us such blows that none
but the grand army could have borne the fatigue of it. But you are not
ignorant that a Frenchman is born a philosopher, and knows that a little
sooner, or a little later, he has got to die. So we were ready to die
without a word, for we liked to see the Emperor doing that on the
geographies."
Here the narrator nimbly described a circle with his foot on the floor
of the barn.
"And Napoleon said, 'There, that's to be a kingdom.' And a kingdom it
was. Ha! the good times! The colonels were generals; the generals,
marshals; and the marshals, kings. There's one of 'em still on his
throne, to prove it to Europe; but he's a Gascon and a traitor to France
for keeping that crown; and he doesn't blush for shame as he ought to
do, because crowns, don't you see, are made of gold. I who am speaking
to you, I have seen, in Paris, eleven kings and a mob of princes
surrounding Napoleon like the rays of the sun. You understand, of
course, that every soldier had the chance to mount a throne, provided
always he had the merit; so a corporal of the Guard was a sight to be
looked at as he walked along, for each man had his share in the victory,
and 'twas plainly set forth in the bulletin. What victories they were!
Austerlitz, where the army manoeuvred as if on parade; Eylau, where we
drowned the Russians in a lake, as though Napoleon had blown them into
it with the breath of his mouth; Wagram, where the army fought for three
days without grumbling. We won as many battles as there are saints in
the calendar. It was proved then, beyond a doubt, that Napoleon had the
sword of God in his scabbard. The soldiers were his friends; he made
them his children; he looked after us, he saw that we had shoes, and
shirts, and great-coats, and bread, and cartridges; but he always kept
up his majesty; for, don't you see, 'twas his business to reign. No
matter for that, however; a sergeant, and even a common soldier, could
say to him, 'my Emperor,' just as you say to me sometimes, 'my good
friend.' He gave us an answer if we appealed to him; he slept in the
snow like the rest of us; and, indeed, he had almost the air of a human
man. I who speak to you, I have seen him with his feet among the
grape-shot, and no more uneasy than you are now--standing steady,
looking through his field-glass, and minding his business. 'Twas that
kept the rest of us quiet. I don't know how he did it, but when he spoke
he made our hearts burn within us; and to show him we were his children,
incapable of balking, didn't we rush at the mouths of the rascally
cannon, that belched and vomited shot and shell, without so much as
saying, 'Look out!' Why! the dying must needs raise their heads to
salute him and cry, 'LONG LIVE THE EMPEROR!'
"I ask you, was that natural? would they have done that for a human man?
"Well, after he had settled the world, the Empress Josephine, his wife,
a good woman all the same, managed matters so that she did not bear him
any children, and he was obliged to give her up, though he loved her
considerably. But, you see, he had to have little ones for reasons of
state. Hearing of this, all the sovereigns of Europe quarrelled as to
which of them should give him a wife. And he married, so they told us,
an Austrian archduchess, daughter of Cæsar, an ancient man about whom
people talk a good deal, and not in France only--where any one will
tell you what he did--but in Europe. It is all true, for I myself who
address you at this moment, I have been on the Danube, and have seen the
remains of a bridge built by that man, who, it seems, was a relation of
Napoleon in Rome, and that's how the Emperor got the inheritance of that
city for his son. So after the marriage, which was a fête for the whole
world, and in honour of which he released the people of ten years'
taxes--which they had to pay all the same, however, because the
assessors didn't take account of what he said--his wife had a little
one, who was King of Rome. Now, there's a thing that had never been seen
on this earth; never before was a child born a king with his father
living. On that day a balloon went up in Paris to tell the news to Rome,
and that balloon made the journey in one day.
"Now, is there any man among you who will stand up here and declare to
me that all that was human? No; it was written above; and may the
scurvy seize 'em who deny that he was sent by God himself for the
triumph of France!
"Well, here's the Emperor of Russia, that used to be his friend, he
gets angry because Napoleon didn't marry a Russian; so he joins with the
English, our enemies--to whom our Emperor always wanted to say a couple
of words in their burrows, only he was prevented. Napoleon gets angry
too; an end had to be put to such doings; so he says to us: 'Soldiers!
you have been masters of every capital in Europe, except Moscow, which
is now the ally of England. To conquer England, and India which belongs
to the English, it becomes our peremptory duty to go to Moscow,' Then he
assembled the greatest army that ever trailed its gaiters over the
globe; and so marvellously in hand it was that he reviewed a million of
men in one day. 'Hourra!'cried the Russians. Down came all Russia
and those animals of Cossacks in a flock. 'Twas nation against nation, a
general hurly-burly, and beware who could; 'Asia against Europe,' as the
Red Man had foretold to Napoleon. 'Enough,' cried the Emperor, 'I'll be
ready.'
"So now, sure enough, came all the kings, as the Red Man had said, to
lick Napoleon's hand! Austria, Prussia, Bavaria, Saxony, Poland, Italy,
every one of them were with us, flattering us; ah, it was fine! The
eagles never cawed so loud as at those parades, perched high above the
banners of all Europe. The Poles were bursting with joy, because
Napoleon was going to release them; and that's why France and Poland are
brothers to this day. 'Russia is ours,' cried the army. We plunged into
it well-supplied; we marched and we marched--no Russians. At last we
found the brutes entrenched on the banks of the Moskva. That's where I
won my cross, and I've got the right to say it was a damnable battle.
This was how it came about. The Emperor was anxious. He had seen the Red
Man, who said to him 'My son, you are going too fast for your feet; you
will lack men; friends will betray you.' So the Emperor offered peace.
But before signing, 'Let us drub those Russians!' he said to us. 'Done!'
cried the army. 'Forward, march!' said the sergeants. My clothes were in
rags, my shoes worn out, from trudging along those roads, which are very
uncomfortable ones; but no matter! I said to myself, 'As it's the last
of our earthquakings, I'll go into it, tooth and nail!' We were drawn up
in line before the great ravine--front seats, as 'twere. Signal given;
and seven hundred pieces of artillery began a conversation that would
bring the blood from your ears. Then--must do justice to one's
enemies--the Russians let themselves be killed like Frenchmen; they
wouldn't give way; we couldn't advance. 'Forward!' some one cried, 'here
comes the Emperor!' True enough; he passed at a gallop, waving his hand
to let us know we must take the redoubt. He inspired us; on we ran; I
was the first in the ravine. Ha! my God! how the lieutenants fell, and
the colonels, and the soldiers! No matter! all the more shoes for those
that had none, and epaulets for the clever ones who knew how to read.
'Victory!' cried the whole line; 'Victory!'--and, would you believe it?
a thing never seen before, there lay twenty-five thousand Frenchmen on
the ground. 'Twas like mowing down a wheat-field; only in place of the
ears of wheat put the heads of men! We were sobered by this time--those
who were left alive. The MAN rode up; we made the circle round him. Ha!
he knew how to cajole his children; he could be amiable when he liked,
and feed 'em with words when their stomachs were ravenous with the
hunger of wolves. Flatterer! he distributed the crosses himself, he
uncovered to the dead, and then he cried to us, 'On! to Moscow!' 'To
Moscow!' answered the army.
"We took Moscow. Would you believe it? the Russians burned their own
city! 'Twas a haystack six miles square, and it blazed for two days. The
buildings crashed like slates, and showers of melted iron and lead
rained down upon us, which was naturally horrible. I may say to you
plainly, it was like a flash of lightning on our disasters. The Emperor
said, 'We have done enough; my soldiers shall rest here.' So we rested
awhile, just to get the breath into our bodies and the flesh on our
bones, for we were really tired. We took possession of the golden cross
that was on the Kremlin; and every soldier brought away with him a small
fortune. But out there the winter sets in a month earlier--a thing those
fools of science didn't properly explain. So, coming back, the cold
nipped us. No longer an army--do you hear me?--no longer any generals,
no longer any sergeants even. 'Twas the reign of wretchedness and
hunger--a reign of equality at last. No one thought of anything but to
see France once more; no one stooped to pick up his gun or his money if
he dropped them; each man followed his nose, and went as he pleased
without caring for glory. The weather was so bad the Emperor couldn't
see his star; there was something between him and the skies. Poor man!
it made him ill to see his eagles flying away from victory. Ah! 'twas a
mortal blow, you may believe me.
"Well, we got to the Beresina, My friends, I can affirm to you by all
that is most sacred, by my honour, that since mankind came into the
world, never, never was there seen such a fricassee of any army--guns,
carriages, artillery-waggons--in the midst of such snows, under such
relentless skies! The muzzles of the muskets burned our hands if we
touched them, the iron was so cold. It was there that the army was saved
by the pontoniers, who were firm at their post; and there that
Gondrin--sole survivor of the men who were bold enough to go into the
water and build the bridges by which the army crossed--that Gondrin,
here present, admirably conducted himself, and saved us from the
Russians, who, I must tell you, still respected the grand army,
remembering its victories. And," he added, pointing to Gondrin, who was
gazing at him with the peculiar attention of a deaf man, "Gondrin is a
finished soldier, a soldier who is honour itself, and he merits your
highest esteem.
"I saw the Emperor," he resumed, "standing by the bridge, motionless,
not feeling the cold--was that human? He looked at the destruction of
his treasure, his friends, his old Egyptians. Bah! all that passed him,
women, army-waggons, artillery, all were shattered, destroyed, ruined.
The bravest carried the eagles; for the eagles, d'ye see, were France,
the nation, all of you! they were the civil and the military honour that
must be kept pure; could their heads be lowered because of the cold? It
was only near the Emperor that we warmed ourselves, because when he was
in danger we ran, frozen as we were--we, who wouldn't have stretched a
hand to save a friend. They told us he wept at night over his poor
family of soldiers. Ah! none but he and Frenchmen could have got
themselves out of that business. We did get out, but with losses, great
losses, as I tell you. The Allies captured our provisions. Men began to
betray him, as the Red Man predicted. Those chatterers in Paris, who had
held their tongues after the Imperial Guard was formed, now thought he
was dead; so they hoodwinked the prefect of police, and hatched a
conspiracy to overthrow the empire. He heard of it; it worried him. He
left us, saying: 'Adieu, my children; guard the outposts; I shall return
to you,' Bah! without him nothing went right; the generals lost their
heads, the marshals talked nonsense and committed follies; but that was
not surprising, for Napoleon, who was kind, had fed 'em on gold; they
had got as fat as lard, and wouldn't stir; some stayed in camp when they
ought to have been warming the backs of the enemy who was between us and
France.
"But the Emperor came back, and he brought recruits, famous recruits; he
changed their backbone and made 'em dogs of war, fit to set their teeth
into anything; and he brought a guard of honour, a fine body
indeed!--all bourgeois, who melted away like butter on a gridiron.
"Well, spite of our stern bearing, here's everything going against us;
and yet the army did prodigies of valour. Then came battles on the
mountains, nations against nations--Dresden, Lützen, Bautzen. Remember
these days, all of you, for 'twas then that Frenchmen were so
particularly heroic that a good grenadier only lasted six months. We
triumphed always; yet there were those English, in our rear, rousing
revolts against us with their lies! No matter, we cut our way home
through the whole pack of the nations. Wherever the Emperor showed
himself we followed him; for if, by sea or land, he gave us the word
'Go!' we went. At last, we were in France; and many a poor foot-soldier
felt the air of his own country restore his soul to satisfaction, spite
of the wintry weather. I can say for myself that it refreshed my life.
Well, next, our business was to defend France, our country, our
beautiful France, against, all Europe, which resented our having laid
down the law to the Russians, and pushed them back into their dens so
that they couldn't eat us up alive, as northern nations, who are dainty
and like southern flesh, have a habit of doing--at least, so I've heard
some generals say. Then the Emperor saw his own father-in-law, his
friends whom he had made kings, and the scoundrels to whom he had given
back their thrones, all against him. Even Frenchmen, and allies in our
own ranks, turned against us under secret orders, as at the battle of
Leipsic. Would common soldiers have been capable of such wickedness?
Three times a day men were false to their word--and they called
themselves princes!
"So, then, France was invaded. Wherever the Emperor showed his lion
face, the enemy retreated; and he did more prodigies in defending France
than ever he had done in conquering Italy, the East, Spain, Europe, and
Russia. He meant to bury every invader under the sod, and teach 'em to
respect the soil of France. So he let them get to Paris, that he might
swallow them at a mouthful, and rise to the height of his genius in a
battle greater than all the rest--a mother-battle, as 'twere. But there,
there! the Parisians were afraid for their twopenny skins, and their
trumpery shops; they opened the gates. Then the Ragusades began, and
happiness ended. The Empress was fooled, and the white banner flaunted
from the windows. The generals whom he had made his nearest friends
abandoned him for the Bourbons--a set of people no one had heard tell
of. The Emperor bade us farewell at Fontainebleau: 'Soldiers!'--I can
hear him now; we wept like children; the flags and the eagles were
lowered as if for a funeral: it was, I may well say it to you, it was
the funeral of the Empire; her dapper armies were nothing now but
skeletons. So he said to us, standing there on the portico of his
palace: 'My soldiers! we are vanquished by treachery; but we shall meet
in heaven, the country of the brave. Defend my child, whom I commit to
you. Long live Napoleon II!' He meant to die, that no man should look
upon Napoleon vanquished; he took poison, enough to have killed a
regiment, because, like Jesus Christ before his Passion, he thought
himself abandoned of God and his talisman. But the poison did not hurt
"See again! he found he was immortal.
"Sure of himself, knowing he must ever be THE EMPEROR, he went for a
while to an island to study out the nature of these others, who, you may
be sure, committed follies without end. Whilst he bided his time down
there, the Chinese, and the wild men on the coast of Africa, and the
Barbary States, and others who are not at all accommodating, know so
well he was more than man that they respected his tent, saying to touch
it would be to offend God. Thus, d'ye see, when these others turned him
from the doors of his own France, he still reigned over the whole world.
Before long he embarked in the same little cockleshell of a boat he had
had in Egypt, sailed round the beard of the English, set foot in France,
and France acclaimed him. The sacred cuckoo flew from spire to spire;
all France cried out with one voice, 'LONG LIVE THE EMPEROR!' In this
region, here, the enthusiasm for that wonder of the ages was, I may say,
solid. Dauphine behaved well; and I am particularly pleased to know that
her people wept when they saw, once more, the gray top-coat. March first
it was, when Napoleon landed with two hundred men to conquer that
kingdom of France and of Navarre, which, on the twentieth of the same
month was again the French Empire. On that day our MAN was in Paris; he
had made a clean sweep, recovered his dear France, and gathered his
veterans together by saying no more than three words, 'I am here.'
"'Twas the greatest miracle God had yet done! Before him, did ever man
recover an empire by showing his hat? And these others, who thought
they had subdued France! Not they! At sight of the eagles, a national
army sprang up, and we marched to Waterloo. There, the Guard died at one
blow. Napoleon, in despair, threw himself three times before the cannon
of the enemy without obtaining death. We saw that. The battle was lost.
That night the Emperor called his old soldiers to him; on the field
soaked with our blood he burned his banners and his eagles--his poor
eagles, ever victorious, who cried 'Forward' in the battles, and had
flown the length and breadth of Europe, they were saved the infamy of
belonging to the enemy: all the treasures of England couldn't get her a
tail-feather of them. No more eagles--the rest is well known. The Red
Man went over to the Bourbons, like the scoundrel that he is. France is
crushed; the soldier is nothing; they deprive him of his dues; they
discharge him to make room for broken-down nobles--ah, 'tis pitiable!
They seized Napoleon by treachery; the English nailed him on a desert
island in mid-ocean on a rock raised ten thousand feet above the earth;
and there he is, and will be, till the Red Man gives him back his power
for the happiness of France. These others say he's dead. Ha, dead! 'Tis
easy to see they don't know Him. They tell that fib to catch the people,
and feel safe in their hovel of a government. Listen! the truth at the
bottom of it all is that his friends have left him alone on the desert
isle to fulfil a prophecy, for I forgot to say that his name, Napoleon,
means 'lion of the desert.' Now this that I tell you is true as the
Gospel. All other tales that you hear about the Emperor are follies
without common-sense; because, d'ye see, God never gave to child of
woman born the right to stamp his name in red as he did, on the earth,
which forever shall remember him! Long live Napoleon, the father of his
people and of the soldier!"
GOOD LUCK IS BETTER THAN GOLD.
There was once upon a time a child who had Good Luck for his godfather.
"I am not Fortune," said Good Luck to the parents; "I have no gifts to
bestow, but whenever he needs help I will be at hand."
"Nothing could be better," said the old couple. They were delighted.
But what pleases the father often fails to satisfy the son: moreover,
every man thinks that he deserves just a little more than he has got,
and does not reckon it to the purpose if his father had less.
Many a one would be thankful to have as good reasons for contentment
as he who had Good Luck for his godfather.
If he fell, Good Luck popped something soft in the way to break his
fall; if he fought, Good Luck directed his blows, or tripped up his
adversary; if he got into a scrape, Good Luck helped him out of it;
and if ever Misfortune met him, Good Luck contrived to hustle her on
the pathway till his godson got safely by.
In games of hazard the godfather played over his shoulder. In matters
of choice he chose for him. And when the lad began to work on his
father's farm the farmer began to get rich. For no bird or field-mouse
touched a seed that his son had sown, and every plant he planted
throve when Good Luck smiled on it.
The boy was not fond of work, but when he did go into the fields, Good
Luck followed him.
"Your christening-day was a blessed day for us all," said the old
farmer.
"He has never given me so much as a lucky sixpence," muttered Good
Luck's godson.
"I am not Fortune--I make no presents," said the godfather.
When we are discontented it is oftener to please our neighbours than
ourselves. It was because the other boys had said--"Simon, the
shoemaker's son, has an alderman for his godfather. He gave him a
silver spoon with the Apostle Peter for the handle; but thy godfather
is more powerful than any alderman"--that Good Luck's godson
complained, "He has never given me so much as a bent sixpence."
By and by the old farmer died, and his son grew up, and had the
largest farm in the country. The other boys grew up also, and as they
looked over the farmer's boundary-wall, they would say:
"Good-morning, Neighbour. That is certainly a fine farm of yours. Your
cattle thrive without loss. Your crops grow in the rain and are reaped
with the sunshine. Mischance never comes your road. What you have
worked for you enjoy. Such success would turn the heads of poor folk
like us. At the same time one would think a man need hardly work for
his living at all who has Good Luck for his godfather."
"That is very true," thought the farmer. "Many a man is prosperous,
and reaps what he sows, who had no more than the clerk and the sexton
for gossips at his christening."
"What is the matter, Godson?" asked Good Luck, who was with him in the
field.
"I want to be rich," said the farmer.
"You will not have to wait long," replied the godfather. "In every
field you sow, in every flock you rear there is increase without
abatement. Your wealth is already tenfold greater than your father's."
"Aye, aye," replied the farmer. "Good wages for good work. But many a
young man has gold at his command who need never turn a sod, and none
of the Good People came to his christening. Fortunatus's Purse now,
or even a sack or two of gold--"
"Peace!" cried the godfather; "I have said that I give no gifts."
Though he had not Fortunatus's Purse, the farmer had now money and to
spare, and when the harvest was gathered in, he bought a fine suit of
clothes, and took his best horse and went to the royal city to see the
sights.
The pomp and splendour, the festivities and fine clothes dazzled him.
"This is a gay life which these young courtiers lead," said he. "A man
has nothing to do but to enjoy himself."
"If he has plenty of gold in his pocket," said a bystander.
By and by the Princess passed in her carriage. She was the King's only
daughter. She had hair made of sunshine, and her eyes were stars.
"What an exquisite creature!" cried the farmer. "What would not one
give to possess her?"
"She has as many suitors as hairs on her head," replied the bystander.
"She wants to marry the Prince of Moonshine, but he only dresses in
silver, and the King thinks he might find a richer son-in-law. The
Princess will go to the highest bidder."
"And I have Good Luck for my godfather, and am not even at court!"
cried the farmer; and he put spurs to his horse, and rode home.
Good Luck was taking care of the farm.
"Listen, Godfather!" cried the young man. "I am in love with the
King's daughter, and want her to wife."
"It is not an easy matter," replied Good Luck, "but I will do what I
can for you. Say that by good luck you saved the Princess's life, or
perhaps better the King's--for they say he is selfish--"
"Tush!" cried the farmer. "The King is covetous, and wants a rich
son-in-law."
"A wise man may bring wealth to a kingdom with his head, if not with
his hands," said Good Luck, "and I can show you a district where the
earth only wants mining to be flooded with wealth. Besides, there are
a thousand opportunities that can be turned to account and influence.
By wits and work, and with Good Luck to help him, many a poorer man
than you has risen to greatness."
"Wits and work!" cried the indignant godson. "You speak well--truly! A
hillman would have made a better godfather. Give me as much gold as
will fill three meal-bins, and you may keep the rest of your help for
those who want it."
Now at this moment by Good Luck stood Dame Fortune. She likes handsome
young men, and there was some little jealousy between her and the
godfather so she smiled at the quarrel.
"You would rather have had me for your gossip?" said she.
"If you would give me three wishes, I would," replied the farmer
boldly, "and I would trouble you no more."
"Will you make him over to me?" said Dame Fortune to the godfather.
"If he wishes it," replied Good Luck. "But if he accepts your gifts he
has no further claim on me."
"Nor on me either," said the Dame. "Hark ye, young man, you mortals
are apt to make a hobble of your three wishes, and you may end with a
sausage at your nose, like your betters."
"I have thought of it too often," replied the farmer, "and I know what
I want. For my first wish I desire imperishable beauty."
"It is yours," said Dame Fortune, smiling as she looked at him.
"The face of a prince and the manners of a clown are poor partners,"
said the farmer. "My second wish is for suitable learning and courtly
manners, which cannot be gained at the plough-tail."
"You have them in perfection," said the Dame, as the young man thanked
her by a graceful bow.
"Thirdly," said he, "I demand a store of gold that I can never
exhaust."
"I will lead you to it," said Dame Fortune; and the young man was so
eager to follow her that he did not even look back to bid farewell to
his godfather.
He was soon at court. He lived in the utmost pomp. He had a suit of
armour made for himself out of beaten gold. No metal less precious
might come near his person, except for the blade of his sword. This
was obliged to be made of steel, for gold is not always strong enough
to defend one's life or his honour. But the Princess still loved the
Prince of Moonshine.
"Stuff and nonsense!" said the King. "I shall give you to the Prince
of Gold."
"I wish I had the good luck to please her," muttered the young Prince.
But he had not, for all his beauty and his wealth. However, she was to
marry him, and that was something.
The preparations for the wedding were magnificent.
"It is a great expense," sighed the King, "but then I get the Prince
of Gold for a son-in-law."
The Prince and his bride drove round the city in a triumphal
procession. Her hair fell over her like sunshine, but the starlight of
her eyes was cold.
In the train rode the Prince of Moonshine, dressed in silver, and
with no colour in his face.
As the bridal chariot approached one of the city gates, two black
ravens hovered over it, and then flew away, and settled on a tree.
Good Luck was sitting under the tree to see his godson's triumph, and
he heard the birds talking above him.
"Has the Prince of Gold no friend who can tell him that there is a
loose stone above the archway that is tottering to fall?" said they.
And Good Luck covered his face with his mantle as the Prince drove
through.
Just as they were passing out of the gateway the stone fell on to the
Prince's head. He wore a casque of pure gold, but his neck was broken.
    "We can't have all this expense for nothing," said the King:
    so he married his daughter to the Prince of Moonshine. If one
    can't get gold one must be content with silver.
"Will you come to the funeral?" asked Dame Fortune of the godfather.
"Not I," replied Good Luck. "I had no hand in this matter."
The rain came down in torrents. The black feathers on the ravens'
backs looked as if they had been oiled.
"Caw! caw!" said they. "It was an unlucky end."
However, the funeral was a very magnificent one, for there was no
stint of gold.
THE HILLMAN AND THE HOUSEWIFE.
It is well known that the Good People cannot abide meanness. They like
to be liberally dealt with when they beg or borrow of the human race;
and, on the other hand, to those who come to them in need, they are
invariably generous.
Now there once lived a certain Housewife who had a sharp eye to her
own interests in temporal matters, and gave alms of what she had no
use for, for the good of her soul. One day a Hillman knocked at her
"Can you lend us a saucepan, good Mother?" said he. "There's a wedding
in the hill, and all the pots are in use."
"Is he to have one?" asked the servant lass who had opened the door.
"Aye, to be sure," answered the Housewife. "One must be neighbourly."
But when the maid was taking a saucepan from the shelf, she pinched
her arm, and whispered sharply--"Not that, you slut! Get the old one
out of the cupboard. It leaks, and the Hillmen are so neat, and such
nimble workers, that they are sure to mend it before they send it
home. So one obliges the Good People, and saves sixpence in tinkering.
But you'll never learn to be notable whilst your head is on your
Thus reproached, the maid fetched the saucepan, which had been laid by
till the tinker's next visit, and gave it to the dwarf, who thanked
her, and went away.
In due time the saucepan was returned, and, as the Housewife had
foreseen, it was neatly mended and ready for use.
At supper-time the maid filled the pan with milk, and set it on the
fire for the children's supper. But in a few minutes the milk was so
burnt and smoked that no one could touch it, and even the pigs refused
the wash into which it was thrown.
"Ah, good-for-nothing hussy!" cried the Housewife, as she refilled the
pan herself, "you would ruin the richest with your carelessness.
There's a whole quart of good milk wasted at once!"
"And that's twopence," cried a voice which seemed to come from the
chimney, in a whining tone, like some nattering, discontented old body
going over her grievances.
The Housewife had not left the saucepan for two minutes, when the
milk boiled over, and it was all burnt and smoked as before.
"The pan must be dirty," muttered the good woman, in great vexation;
"and there are two full quarts of milk as good as thrown to the dogs."
"And that's fourpence," added the voice in the chimney.
After a thorough cleaning, the saucepan was once more filled and set
on the fire, but with no better success. The milk was hopelessly
spoilt, and the housewife shed tears of vexation at the waste, crying,
"Never before did such a thing befall me since I kept house! Three
quarts of new milk burnt for one meal!"
"And that's sixpence," cried the voice from the chimney. "You
didn't save the tinkering after all Mother!"
With which the Hillman himself came tumbling down the chimney, and
went off laughing through the door.
But thenceforward the saucepan was as good as any other.
THE NECK.
A Legend of a Lake.
On a certain lake there once lived a Neck, or Water Sprite, who
desired, above all things, to obtain a human soul. Now when the sun
shone this Neck rose up and sat upon the waves and played upon his
harp. And he played so sweetly that the winds stayed to listen to him,
and the sun lingered in his setting, and the moon rose before her
time. And the strain was in praise of immortality.
Furthermore, out of the lake there rose a great rock, whereon dwelt an
aged hermit, who by reason of his loneliness was afflicted with a
spirit of melancholy; so that when the fit was on him, he was
constantly tempted to throw himself into the water, for his life was
burdensome to him. But one day, when this gloomy madness had driven
him to the edge of the rock to cast himself down, the Neck rose at the
same moment, and sitting upon a wave, began to play. And the strain
was in praise of immortality. And the melody went straight to the
heart of the hermit as a sunbeam goes into a dark cave, and it
dispelled his gloom, and he thought all to be as well with him as
before it had seemed ill. And he called to the Neck and said, "What is
that which thou dost play, my son?"
And the Neck answered, "It is in praise of immortality."
Then said the hermit, "I beg that thou wilt play frequently beneath
this rock; for I am an aged and solitary man, and by reason of my
loneliness, life becomes a burden to me, and I am tempted to throw it
away. But by this gracious strain the evil has been dispelled.
Wherefore I beg thee to come often and to play as long as is
convenient. And yet I cannot offer thee any reward, for I am poor and
without possessions."
Then the Neck replied, "There are treasures below the water as above,
and I desire no earthly riches. But if thou canst tell me how I may
gain a human soul, I will play on till thou shalt bid me cease."
And the hermit said, "I must consider the matter. But I will return
to-morrow at this time and answer thee."
Then the next day he returned as he had said, and the Neck was
waiting impatiently on the lake, and he cried, "What news, my father?"
And the hermit said, "If that at any time some human being will freely
give his life for thee, thou wilt gain a human soul. But thou also
must die the selfsame day."
"The short life for the long one!" cried the Neck; and he played a
melody so full of happiness that the blood danced through the hermit's
veins as if he were a boy again. But the next day when he came as
usual the Neck called to him and said, "My father, I have been
thinking. Thou art aged and feeble, and at the most there are but few
days of life remaining to thee. Moreover, by reason of thy loneliness
even these are a burden. Surely there is none more fit than thou to be
the means of procuring me a human soul. Wherefore I beg of thee, let
us die to-day."
But the hermit cried out angrily, "Wretch! Is this thy gratitude?
Wouldst thou murder me?"
"Nay, old man," replied the Neck, "thou shalt part easily with thy
little fag-end of life. I can play upon my harp a strain of such
surpassing sadness that no human heart that hears it but must break.
And yet the pain of that heartbreak shall be such that thou wilt not
know it from rapture. Moreover, when the sun sets below the water, my
spirit also will depart without suffering. Wherefore I beg of thee,
let us die to-day."
"Truly," said the hermit, "it is because thou art only a Neck, and
nothing better, that thou dost not know the value of human life."
"And art thou a man, possessed already of a soul, and destined for
immortality," cried the Neck, "and dost haggle and grudge to benefit
me by the sacrifice of a few uncertain days, when it is but to
exchange them for the life that knows no end?"
"Our days are always uncertain," replied the hermit; "but existence is
very sweet, even to the most wretched. Moreover, I see not that thou
hast any claim upon mine." Saying which he returned to his cell, but
the Neck, flinging aside his harp, sat upon the water, and wept
bitterly.
Days passed, and the hermit did not show himself, and at last the Neck
resolved to go and visit him. So he took his harp, and taking also the
form of a boy with long fair hair and a crimson cap, he appeared in
the hermit's cell. There he found the old man stretched upon his
pallet, for lie was dying. When he saw the Neck he was glad, and said,
"I have desired to see thee, for I repent myself that I did not
according to thy wishes. Yet is the desire of life stronger in the
human breast than thou canst understand. Nevertheless I am sorry, and
I am sorry also that, as I am sick unto death, my life will no longer
avail thee. But when I am dead, do thou take all that belongs to me,
and dress thyself in my robe, and go out into the world, and do works
of mercy, and perchance some one whom thou hast benefited will be
found willing to die with thee, that thou mayst obtain a soul."
"Now indeed I thank thee!" cried the Neck. "But yet one word
more--what are these works of which thou speakest?"
"The corporal works of mercy are seven," gasped the hermit, raising
himself on his arm. "To feed the hungry and give the thirsty drink, to
visit the sick, to redeem captives, to clothe the naked, to shelter
the stranger and the houseless, to visit the widow and fatherless, and
to bury the dead." Then even as he spoke the last words the hermit
died. And the Neck clothed himself in his robe, and, not to delay in
following the directions given to him, he buried the hermit with pious
care, and planted flowers upon his grave. After which he went forth
into the world.
Now for three hundred years did the Neck go about doing acts of mercy
and charity towards men. And amongst the hungry, and the naked, and
the sick, and the poor, and the captives, there were not a few who
seemed to be weary of this life of many sorrows. But when he had fed
the hungry, and clothed the naked, and relieved the sick, and made
the poor rich, and set the captive free, life was too dear to all of
them to be given up. Therefore he betook himself to the most miserable
amongst men, and offering nothing but an easy death in a good cause,
he hoped to find some aged and want-worn creature who would do him the
kindness he desired. But of those who must look forward to the fewest
days and to the most misery there was not one but, like the fabled
woodcutter, chose to trudge out to the end his miserable span.
So when three hundred years were past, the Neck's heart failed him,
and he said, "All this avails nothing. Wherefore I will return to the
lake, and there abide what shall befall." And this he accordingly did.
Now one evening there came a tempest down from the hills, and there
was a sudden squall on the lake. And a certain young man in a boat
upon the lake was overtaken by the storm. And as he struggled hard,
and it seemed as if every moment must be his last, a young maid who
was his sweetheart came down to the shore, and cried aloud in her
agony, "Alas, that his young life should be cut short thus!"
"Trouble not thyself," said the Neck; "this life is so short and so
uncertain, that if he were rescued to-day he might be taken from thee
to-morrow. Only in eternity is love secure. Wherefore be patient, and
thou shalt soon follow him."
"And who art thou that mockest my sorrow?" cried the maiden.
"One who has watched the passing misfortunes of many generations
before thine," replied the Neck.
And when the maiden looked, and saw one like a little old man wringing
out his beard into the lake, she knew it was a Neck, and cried, "Now
surely thou art a Neck, and they say, 'When Necks play, the winds
wisht;' wherefore I beg of thee to play upon thy harp, and it may be
that the storm will lull, and my beloved will be saved."
But the Neck answered, "It is not worth while."
And when the maiden could not persuade him, she fell upon her face in
bitter grief, and cried, "Oh, my Beloved! Would GOD I could die for
thee!"
"And yet thou wouldst not if thou couldst," said the Neck.
"If it be in thy power to prove me--prove me!" cried the maiden; "for
indeed he is the only stay of aged parents, and he is young and
unprepared for death. Moreover his life is dearer to me than my own."
Then the Neck related his own story, and said, "If thou wilt do this
for me, which none yet has done whom I have benefited, I will play
upon my harp, and if the winds wisht, thou must die this easy death;
but if I fail in my part, I shall not expect thine to be fulfilled.
And we must both abide what shall befall, even as others." And to this
the maiden consented most willingly. Only she said, "Do this for me, I
beg of thee. Let him come so near that I may just see his face before
I die." And it was so agreed.
Then the aged Neck drew forth his harp and began to play. And as he
played the wind stayed, as one who pauses to hearken with cleft lips,
and the lake rose and fell gently, like the bosom of a girl moved by
some plaintive song, and the sun burst forth as if to see who made
such sweet music. And so through this happy change the young man got
safe to land. Then the Neck turned to the maiden and said, "Dost thou
hold to thy promise?" And she bowed her head.
"In the long life be thy recompense!" cried the Neck, fervently, and
taking his harp again, he poured his whole spirit into the strain. And
as he played, it seemed as if the night wind moaned among pine-trees,
but it was more mournful. And it was as the wail of a mother for her
only son, and yet fuller of grief. Or like a Dead March wrung from the
heart of a great musician--loading the air with sorrow--and yet all
these were as nothing to it for sadness. And when the maiden heard it,
it was more than she could bear, and her heart broke, as the Neck had
said. Then the young man sprang to shore, and when she could see his
face clearly, her soul passed, and her body fell like a snapped flower
to the earth.
Now when the young man knew what was befallen, he fell upon the Neck
to kill him, who said, "Thou mayest spare thyself this trouble, for in
a few moments I shall be dead. But do thou take my robe and my harp,
and thou shalt be a famous musician."
Now even as the Neck spoke the sun sank, and he fell upon his face.
And when the young man lifted the robe, behold there was nothing under
it but the harp, across which there swept such a wild and piteous
chord that all the strings burst as if with unutterable grief.
Then the young man lifted the body of his sweetheart in his arms, and
carried her home, and she was buried with many tears.
And in due time he put fresh strings to the harp, which, though it was
not as when it was in the hands of the Neck, yet it made most
exquisite music. And the young man became a famous musician. For out
of suffering comes song.
Furthermore, he occupied himself in good works until that his time
also came.
And in Eternity Love was made secure.
THE NIX IN MISCHIEF.
A certain lake in Germany was once the home of a Nix, who became tired
of the monotony of life under water, and wished to go into the upper
world and amuse himself.
His friends and relations all tried to dissuade him. "Be wise," said
they, "and remain where you are safe, seeing that no business summons
you from the lake. Few of our kindred have had dealings with the human
race without suffering from their curiosity or clumsiness; and, do
them what good you may, in the long run you will reap nothing but
ingratitude. From how many waters have they not already banished us?
Wherefore let well alone, and stay where you are."
But this counsel did not please the Nix--(as, indeed, there is no
reason to suppose that advice is more palatable under water than on
dry land)--and he only said, "I shall not expect gratitude, for I have
no intention of conferring benefits; but I wish to amuse myself. The
Dwarfs and Kobolds play what pranks they please on men and women, and
they do not always have the worst of it. When I hear of their
adventures, the soles of my feet tingle. This is a sign of travelling,
and am I to be debarred from fun because I live in a lake instead of a
hill?"
His friends repeated their warnings, but to no purpose. The Nix
remained unconvinced, and spent his time in dreaming of the clever
tricks by which he should outwit the human race, and the fame he would
thereby acquire on his return to the lake.
Mischief seldom lacks opportunity, and shortly after this it happened
that a young girl came down to the lake for water to wash with; and
dipping her pail just above the Nix's head, in a moment he jumped in,
and was brought safe to land. The maid was Bess, the washerwoman's
daughter; and as she had had one good scolding that morning for
oversleeping herself, and another about noon for dawdling with her
work, she took up the pail and set off home without delay.
But though she held it steadily enough, the bucket shook, and the
water spilled hither and thither. Thinking that her right arm might be
tired, she moved the weight to her left, but with no better success,
for the water still spilled at every step. "One would think there were
fishes in the pail," said Bess, as she set it down. But there was
nothing to be seen but a thin red water-worm wriggling at the bottom,
such as you may see any day in a soft-water tub. It was in this shape,
however, that the Nix had disguised himself, and he almost writhed out
of his skin with delight at the success of his first essay in
mischief.
When they once more set forward the Nix leaped and jumped harder than
ever, so that not only was the water spilled, but the maiden's dress
was soaked, and her tears dropped almost as fast as the wet dripped
from her clothes.
"The pail is bewitched!" cried the poor girl. "How my mother will beat
me for this! And my back aches as if I were carrying lead, and yet the
water is nearly all gone."
"This is something like fun!" laughed the Nix. "When I go home and
relate my adventures, no dwarfs pranks will be named again!" But
when Bess looked into the pail, he was the same slimy, stupid-looking
worm as before. She dared not return to the lake for more
water--"for," said she, "I should be as much beaten for being late as
for bringing short measure, and have the labour to boot." So she took
up her burden again, and the Nix began his dance afresh, and by the
time they came to their journey's end, there was not a quart of water
in the pail.
"Was ever a poor woman plagued with such a careless hussy?" cried the
mother when she saw the dripping dress; and, as Bess had expected, she
seasoned her complaints with a hearty slap. "And look what she calls a
pailful of water!" added the mother, with a second blow.
"Late in the morning's unlucky all day," thought poor Bess, and, as
her mother curled her, she screamed till the house rang with the
noise; for she had good lungs, and knew that it is well to cry out
before one gets too much hurt.
Meanwhile the Nix thought she was enduring agonies, and could hardly
contain his mischievous glee; and when the woman bade her "warm some
water quickly for the wash," he was in no way disturbed, for he had
never seen boiling water, and only anticipated fresh sport as he
slipped from the pail into the kettle.
"Now," cried the mother sharply, "see if you can lift that without
slopping your clothes."
"Aye, aye," laughed the Nix, "see if you can, my dear!" and as poor
Bess seized it in her sturdy red hands he began to dance as before.
But the kettle had a lid, which the pail had not. Moreover Bess was a
strong, strapping lass, and, stimulated by the remembrance of her
mother's slaps, with a vigorous effort she set the kettle on the fire.
"I shall be glad when I'm safely in bed," she muttered. "Everything
goes wrong to-day."
"It is warm in here," said the Nix to himself, after a while; "in
fact--stuffy. But one must pay something for a frolic, and it tickles
my ears to hear that old woman rating her daughter for my pranks. Give
me time and opportunity, and I'll set the whole stupid race by the
ears. There she goes again! It is worth enduring a little discomfort,
though it certainly is warm, and I fancy it grows warmer."
By degrees the bottom of the kettle grew quite hot, and burnt the Nix,
so that he had to jump up and down in the water to keep himself cool.
The noise of this made the woman think that the kettle was boiling,
and she began to scold her daughter as before, shouting, "Are you
coming with that tub to-night or not? The water is hot already."
This time the Nix laughed (as they say) on the other side of his
mouth; for the water had now become as hot as the bottom of the
kettle, and he screamed at the top of his shrill tiny voice with pain.
"How the kettle sings to-night!" said Bess, "and how it rains!" she
added. For at that moment a tremendous storm burst around the house,
and the rain poured down in sheets of water, as if it meant to wash
everything into the lake. The kettle now really boiled, and the lid
danced up and down with the frantic leaping and jumping of the
agonized Nix, who puffed and blew till his breath came out of the
spout in clouds of steam.
"If your eyes were as sharp as your ears you'd see that the water is
boiling over," snapped the woman; and giving her daughter a passing
push, she hurried to the fire-place, and lifted the kettle on to the
ground.
But no sooner had she set it down, than the lid flew off, and out
jumped a little man with green teeth and a tall green hat, who ran out
of the door wringing his hands and crying--
"Three hundred and three years have I lived in the water of this lake,
and I never knew it boil before!"
As he crossed the threshold, a clap of thunder broke with what sounded
like a peal of laughter from many voices, and then the storm ceased as
suddenly as it had begun.
The woman now saw how matters stood, and did not fail next morning to
fasten an old horseshoe to the door of her house. And seeing that she
had behaved unjustly to her daughter, she bought her the gayest set
of pink ribbons that were to be found at the next fair.
It is on record that Bess (who cared little for slaps and sharp
speeches) thought this the best bargain she had ever made. But whether
the Nix was equally well satisfied is not known.
THE COBBLER AND THE GHOSTS.
Long ago there lived a cobbler who had very poor wits, but by strict
industry he could earn enough to keep himself and his widowed mother
in comfort.
In this manner he had lived for many years in peace and prosperity,
when a distant relative died who left him a certain sum of money. This
so elated the cobbler that he could think of nothing else, and his
only talk was of the best way of spending the legacy.
His mother advised him to lay it by against a rainy day.
"For," said she, "we have lived long in much comfort as we are, and
have need of nothing; but when you grow old, or if it should please
Heaven that you become disabled, you will then be glad of your
savings."
But to this the cobbler would not listen. "No," said he, "if we save
the money it may be stolen, but if we spend it well, we shall have
the use of what we buy, and may sell it again if we are so minded."
He then proposed one purchase after another, and each was more foolish
than the rest. When this had gone on for some time, one morning he
exclaimed: "I have it at last! We will buy the house. It cannot be
stolen or lost, and when it is ours we shall have no rent to pay, and
I shall not have to work so hard."
"He will never hit on a wiser plan than that," thought the widow; "it
is not to be expected." So she fully consented to this arrangement,
which was duly carried out; and the bargain left the cobbler with a
few shillings, which he tied up in a bag and put in his pocket, having
first changed them into pence, that they might make more noise when he
jingled the bag as he walked down the street.
Presently he said; "It is not fit that a man who lives in his own
house, and has ready money in his pocket too, should spend the whole
day in labouring with his hands. Since by good luck I can read, it
would be well that I should borrow a book from the professor, for
study is an occupation suitable to my present position."
Accordingly, he went to the professor, whom he found seated in his
library, and preferred his request.
"What book do you want?" asked the professor.
The cobbler stood and scratched his head thoughtfully. The professor
thought that he was trying to recall the name of the work; but in
reality he was saying to himself: "How much additional knowledge one
requires if he has risen ever so little in life! Now, if I did but
know where it is proper to begin in a case full of books like this!
Should one take the first on the top shelf, or the bottom shelf, to
the left, or to the right?"
At last he resolved to choose the book nearest to him; so drawing it
out from the rest, he answered--
"This one, if it please you, learned sir." The professor lent it to
him, and he took it home and began to read.
It was, as it happened, a book about ghosts and apparitions; and the
cobbler's mind was soon so full of these marvels that he could talk of
nothing else, and hardly did a stroke of work for reading and
pondering over what he read. He could find none of his neighbours who
had seen a ghost, though most had heard of such things, and many
believed in them.
"Live and learn," thought the cobbler; "here is fame as well as
wealth. If I could but see a ghost there would be no more to desire."
And with this intent he sallied forth late one night to the
churchyard.
Meanwhile a thief (who had heard the jingle of his money-bag)
resolved to profit by the cobbler's whim; so wrapping himself in a
sheet, he laid wait for him in a field that he must cross to reach the
church.
When the cobbler saw the white figure, he made sure, that he had now
seen a ghost, and already felt proud of his own acquaintance, as a
remarkable character. Meanwhile, the thief stood quite still, and the
cobbler walked boldly up to him, expecting that the phantom would
either vanish or prove so impalpable that he could pass through it as
through a mist, of which he had read many notable instances in the
professor's book. He soon found out his mistake, however, for the
supposed ghost grappled him, and without loss of time relieved him of
his money-bag. The cobbler (who was not wanting in courage) fastened
as tightly on to the sheet, which he still held with desperate
firmness when the thief had slipped through his fingers; and after
waiting in vain for further marvels, he carried the sheet home to his
mother, and narrated his encounter with the ghost.
"Alack-a-day! that I should have a son with so little wit!" cried the
old woman; "it was no ghost, but a thief, who is now making merry with
all the money we possessed."
"We have his sheet," replied her son; "and that is due solely to my
determination. How could I have acted better?"
"You should have grasped the man, not the sheet," said the widow,
"and pummelled him till he cried out and dropped the money-bag."
"Live and learn," said the cobbler. The next night he went out as
before, and this time reached the churchyard unmolested. He was just
climbing the stile, when he again saw what seemed to be a white figure
standing near the church. As before, it proved solid, and this time he
pummelled it till his fingers bled, and for very weariness he was
obliged to go home and relate his exploits. The ghost had not cried
out, however, nor even so much as moved, for it was neither more nor
less than a tall tombstone shining white in the moonlight.
"Alack-a-day!" cried the old woman, "that I should have a son with so
little wit as to beat a gravestone till his knuckles are sore! Now if
he had covered it with something black that it might not alarm timid
women or children, that would at least have been an act of charity."
"Live and learn," said the cobbler. The following night he again set
forth, but this time in another direction. As he was crossing a field
behind his house he saw some long pieces of linen which his mother had
put out to bleach in the dew.
"More ghosts!" cried the shoemaker, "and they know who is behind them.
They have fallen flat at the sound of my footsteps. But one must
think of others as well as oneself, and it is not every heart that is
as stout as mine." Saying which he returned to the house for something
black to throw over the prostrate ghosts. Now the kitchen chimney had
been swept that morning, and by the back door stood a sack of soot.
"What is blacker than soot?" said the cobbler; and taking the sack, he
shook it out over the pieces of linen till not a thread of white was
to be seen. After which he went home, and boasted of his good deeds.
The widow now saw that she must be more careful as to what she said;
so, after weighing the matter for some time, she suggested to the
cobbler that the next night he should watch for ghosts at home; "for
they are to be seen," said she, "as well when one is in bed as in the
fields."
"There you are right," said the cobbler, "for I have this day read of
a ghost that appeared to a man in his own house. The candles burnt
blue, and when he had called thrice upon the apparition, he became
senseless."
"That was his mistake," said the old woman. "He should have turned a
deaf ear, and even pretended to slumber; but it is not every one who
has courage for this. If one could really fall asleep in the face of
the apparition, there would be true bravery."
"Leave that to me," said the cobbler. And the widow went off
chuckling, to herself, "If he comes to any mischance by holding his
tongue and going to sleep, ill-luck has got him by the leg, and
counsel is wasted on him."
As soon as his mother was in bed, the cobbler prepared for his watch.
First he got together all the candles in the house, and stuck them
here and there about the kitchen, and sat down to watch till they
should burn blue. After waiting some time, during which the candles
only guttered with the draughts, the cobbler decided to go to rest for
a while. "It is too early yet," he thought; "I shall see nothing till
midnight."
Very soon, however, he fell asleep; but towards morning he awoke, and
in the dim light perceived a figure in white at his bedside. It was a
blacksmith who lived near, and he had run in in his night-shirt
without so much as slippers on his feet.
"The ghost at last!" thought the cobbler, and, remembering his
mother's advice, he turned over and shut his eyes.
"Neighbour! neighbour!" cried the blacksmith, "your house is on fire!"
"An old bird is not to be caught with chaff," chuckled the cobbler to
himself; and he pulled the bed-clothes over his head.
"Neighbour!" roared the blacksmith, snatching at the quilt to drag it
off, "are you mad? The house is burning over your head. Get up for
your life!"
"I have the courage of a general, and more," thought the cobbler; and
holding tightly on to the clothes he pretended to snore.
"If you will burn, bum!" cried the blacksmith angrily, "but I mean to
save my bones"--with which he ran off.
And burnt the cobbler undoubtedly would have been, had not his
mother's cries at last convinced him that the candles had set fire to
his house, which was wrapped in flames. With some difficulty he
escaped with his life, but of all he possessed nothing remained to him
but his tools and a few articles of furniture that the widow had
saved.
As he was now again reduced to poverty, he was obliged to work as
diligently as in former years, and passed the rest of his days in the
same peace and prosperity which he had before enjoyed.
THE LAIRD AND THE MAN OF PEACE.
In the Highlands of Scotland there once lived a Laird of Brockburn,
who would not believe in fairies. Although his sixth cousin on the
mother's side, as he returned one night from a wedding, had seen the
Men of Peace hunting on the sides of Ben Muich Dhui, dressed in green,
and with silver-mounted bridles to their horses which jingled as they
rode; and though Rory the fiddler having gone to play at a christening
did never come home, but crossing a hill near Brockburn in a mist was
seduced into a Shianor fairy turret, where, as all decent bodies
well believe, he is playing still--in spite, I say, of the wise saws
and experience of all his neighbours, Brockburn remained obstinately
incredulous.
[Footnote 1: Shian, a Gaelic name for fairy towers, which by day are
not to be told from mountain crags.]
Not that he bore any ill-will to the Good People, or spoke uncivilly
of them; indeed he always disavowed any feeling of disrespect towards
them if they existed, saying that he was a man of peace himself, and
anxious to live peaceably with whatever neighbours he had, but that
till he had seen one of the Daoiné Shihe could not believe in
[Footnote 2: Daoiné Shi (pronounced Dheener Shee) = Men of Peace.]
Now one afternoon, between Hallowmas and Yule, it chanced that the
Laird, being out on the hills looking for some cattle, got parted from
his men and dogs and was overtaken by a mist, in which, familiar as
the country was to him, he lost his way.
In vain he raised his voice high, and listened low, no sound of man or
beast came back to him through the thickening vapour.
Then night fell, and darkness was added to the fog, so that Brockburn
needed to sound every step with his rungbefore he took it.
[Footnote 3: Rung = a thick stick.]
Suddenly light footsteps pattered beside him, then Something rubbed
against him, then It ran between his legs. The delighted Laird made
sure that his favourite collie had found him once more.
"Wow, Jock, man!" he cried; "but ye needna throw me on my face. What's
got ye the night, that you should lose your way in a bit mist?"
To this a voice from the level of his elbow replied, in piping but
patronizing tones;
"Never did I lose my way in a mist since the night that Finn crossed
over to Ireland in the Dawn of History. Eh, Laird! I'm weel acquaint
with every bit path on the hill-side these hundreds of years, and I'll
guide ye safe hame, never fear!"
The hairs on Brockburn's head stood on end till they lifted his broad
bonnet, and a damp chill broke out over him that was not the fog. But,
for all that, he stoutly resisted the evidence of his senses, and only
felt about him for the collie's head to pat, crying:
"Bark! Jock, my mannie, bark! Then I'll recognize your voice, ye ken.
It's no canny to hear ye speak like a Christian, my wee doggie."
"I'm nae your doggie, I'm a Man of Peace," was the reply. "Dinna
miscall your betters, Brockburn: why will ye not credit our existence,
man?"
"Seein's believin'," said the Laird, stubbornly; "but the mist's ower
thick for seein' the night, ye ken."
"Turn roun' to your left, man, and ye'll see," said the Dwarf, and
catching Brockburn by the arm, he twisted him swiftly round three
times, when a sudden blaze of light poured through the mist, and
revealed a crag of the mountain well known to the Laird, and which he
now saw to be a kind of turret, or tower.
Lights shone gaily through the crevices or windows of the Shian,
and sounds of revelry came forth, among which fiddling was
conspicuous. The tune played at that moment was "Delvyn-side."
Blinded by the light, and amazed at what he saw, the Laird staggered,
and was silent.
"Keep to your feet, man--keep to your feet!" said the Dwarf, laughing.
"I doubt ye're fou, Brockburn!"
"I'm nae fou," said the Laird, slowly, his rung grasped firmly in his
hand, and his bonnet set back from his face, which was deadly pale.
"But--man-is yon Rory? I'd know his fiddle in a thousand."
"Ask no questions, and ye'll be tellt no lees," said the Dwarf. Then
stepping up to the door of the Shian, he stood so that the light
from within fell full upon him, and the astonished Laird saw a tiny
but well-proportioned man, with delicate features, and golden hair
flowing over his shoulders. He wore a cloak of green cloth, lined with
daisies, and had silver shoes. His beautiful face quivered with
amusement, and he cried triumphantly, "D'ye see me?--d'ye see me noo,
Brockburn?"
"Aye, aye," said the Laird; "and seein's believin'."
"Then roun' wi' ye!" shouted the Man of Peace; and once more seizing
the Laird by the arm, he turned him swiftly round--this time, to the
right--and at the third turn the light vanished, and Brockburn and
the Man of Peace were once more alone together in the mist.
"Aweel, Brockburn," said the Man of Peace, "I'll alloo ye're candid,
and have a convincible mind. I'm no ill disposit to ye, and yese get
safe hame, man."
As he spoke he stooped down, and picking up half-a-dozen big stones
from the mountain-side, he gave them to the Laird, saying, "If the
gudewife asks ye about the bit stanes, say ye got them in a
compliment."[4]
[Footnote 4: "In a compliment" = "as a present."]
Brockburn put them into his pocket, briefly saying, "I'm obleeged to
ye;" but as he followed the Man of Peace down the hill-side, he found
the obligation so heavy, that from time to time he threw a stone away,
unobserved, as he hoped, by his companion. When the first stone fell,
the Man of Peace looked sharply round, saying:
"What's yon?"
"It'll be me striking my rung upon the ground," said the Laird.
"You're mad," said the Man of Peace, and Brockburn felt sure that he
knew the truth, and was displeased. But as they went on, the stones
were so heavy, and bumped the Laird's side so hard, that he threw away
a second, dropping it as gently as he could. But the sound of its
fall did not escape the ears of the Man of Peace, who cried as before:
"It's jest a nasty hoastthat I have," said the Laird.
[Footnote 5: "Hoast" = cough.]
"Man, you're daft," said the Dwarf, contemptuously; "that's what ails
ye."
The Laird now resolved to be prudent, but the inconvenience of his
burden was so great that after a while he resolved to risk the
displeasure of the Man of Peace once more, and gently slipped a third
stone to the ground.
"Third time's lucky," he thought. But the proverb failed him, for the
Dwarf turned as before, shouting: "What's yon?"
"It'll be my new broguesthat ye hear bumpin' Upon the muckle
stanes," said the Laird.
[Footnote 6: "Brogues" = shoes.]
"Ye're fou, Brockburn, I tellt ye so. Ye're fou!" growled the Man of
Peace, angrily, and the Laird dared not drop any more of the Dwarfs
gifts. After a while his companion's good-humour seemed to return, and
he became talkative and generous.
"I mind your great-grandfather weel, Brockburn. He was a hamely man, I
found his sheep for him one nicht on this verra hill-side. Mair by
token, ye'll find your beasties at hame, and the men and the dogs
forebye."
The Laird thanked him heartily, and after a while the Dwarf became
more liberal-spirited still.
"Yese no have to say that ye've been with the Daoiné Shi and are no
the better for it," he said. "I'm thinking I'll grant ye three wushes.
But choose wisely, man, and dinna throw them away. I hae my fears
that ye're no without a bee in your bonnet, Brockburn."
Incensed by this insinuation, the Laird defended his own sagacity at
some length, and retorted on his companion with doubts of the power of
the Daoiné Shi to grant wishes.
"The proof of the pudding's in the eating o't," said the Man of Peace.
"Wush away, Brockburn, and mak the nut as hard to crack as ye will."
The Laird at once began to cast about in his mind for three wishes
sufficiently comprehensive to secure his lifelong prosperity; but the
more he beat his brains the less could he satisfy himself.
How many miles he wandered thus, the Dwarf keeping silently beside
him, he never knew, before he sank exhausted on the ground, saying:
"I'm thinking, man, that if ye could bring hame to me, in place of
bringing me hame, I'd misdoubt your powers nae mair. It's a far cry to
Loch Awe,ye ken, and it's a weary long road to Brockburn."
[Footnote 7: "It's a far cry to Loch Awe."--Scotch Proverb.]
"Is this your wush?" asked the Man of Peace.
"This is my wush," said the Laird, striking his rung upon the ground.
The words had scarcely passed his lips when the whole homestead of
Brockburn, house and farm buildings, was planted upon the bleak
hill-side.
The astonished Laird now began to bewail the rash wish which had
removed his home from the sheltered and fertile valley where it
originally stood to the barren side of a bleak mountain.
The Man of Peace, however, would not take any hints as to undoing his
work of his own accord. All he said was:
"If ye wush it away, so it'll be. But then ye'll only have one wush
left. Ye've small discretion the nicht, Brockburn, I'm feared."
"To leave the steading in sic a spot is no to be thought on," sighed
the Laird, as he spent his second wish in undoing his first. But he
cannily added the provision:
"And ye may tak me wi' it."
The words were no sooner spoken than the homestead was back in its
place, and Brockburn himself was lying in his own bed, Jock, his
favourite collie, barking and licking his face by turns for joy.
"Whisht, whisht, Jock!" said the Laird. "Ye wouldna bark when I begged
of ye, so ye may hand your peace noo."
And pushing the collie from him, he sat up in bed and looked anxiously
but vainly round the chamber for the Man of Peace.
"Lie doun, lie doun," cried the gudewife from beside him. "Ye're
surely out o' your wuts, Brockburn. Would ye gang stravaging about the
country again the nicht?"
"Where is he?" cried the Laird.
"There's not a soul here but your lawful wife and your ain dear
doggie. Was there ae body that ye expected?" asked his wife.
"The Man o' Peace, woman!" cried Brockburn. "I've ane o' my wushes to
get, and I maun hae't."
"The man's mad!" was the gudewife's comment. "Ye've surely forgotten
yoursel, Brockburn. Ye never believed in the Daoiné Shi before."
"Seein's believin'," said the Laird. "I forgathered with a Man o'
Peace the nicht on the hill, and I wush I just saw him again."
As the Laird spoke the window of the chamber was lit up from without,
and the Man of Peace appeared sitting on the window-ledge in his
daisy-lined cloak, his feet hanging down into the room, the silver
shoes glittering as they dangled.
"I'm here, Brockburn!" he cried. "But eh, man! ye've had your last
wush."
And even as the stupefied Laird gazed, the light slowly died away, and
the Man of Peace vanished also.
On the following morning the Laird was roused from sleep by loud cries
of surprise and admiration.
The good wife had been stirring for some hours, and in emptying the
pockets of her good man's coat she had found three huge cairngorms of
exquisite tint and lustre. Brockburn thus discovered the value of the
gifts, half of which he had thrown away.
But no subsequent visits to the hill-side led to their recovery. Many
a time did the Laird bring home a heavy pocketful of stones, at the
thrifty gudewife's bidding, but they only proved to be the common
stones of the mountain-side. The Shian could never be distinguished
from any other crag, and the Daoiné Shi were visible no more.
Yet it is said that the Laird of Brockburn prospered and throve
thereafter, in acre, stall, and steading, as those seldom prosper who
have not the good word of the People of Peace.
THE OGRE COURTING.
In days when ogres were still the terror of certain districts, there
was one who had long kept a whole neighbourhood in fear without any
one daring to dispute his tyranny.
By thefts and exactions, by heavy ransoms from merchants too old and
tough to be eaten, in one way and another, the Ogre had become very
rich; and although those who knew could tell of huge cellars full of
gold and jewels, and yards and barns groaning with the weight of
stolen goods, the richer he grew the more anxious and covetous he
became. Moreover, day by day, he added to his stores; for though (like
most ogres) he was as stupid as he was strong, no one had ever been
found, by force or fraud, to get the better of him.
What he took from the people was not their heaviest grievance. Even to
be killed and eaten by him was not the chance they thought of most. A
man can die but once; and if he is a sailor, a shark may eat him,
which is not so much better than being devoured by an ogre. No, that
was not the worst. The worst was this--he would keep getting married.
And as he liked little wives, all the short women lived in fear and
dread. And as his wives always died very soon, he was constantly
courting fresh ones.
Some said he ate his wives; some said he tormented, and others, that
he only worked them to death. Everybody knew it was not a desirable
match, and yet there was not a father who dare refuse his daughter if
she were asked for. The Ogre only cared for two things in a woman--he
liked her to be little, and a good housewife.
Now it was when the Ogre had just lost his twenty-fourth wife (within
the memory of man) that these two qualities were eminently united in
the person of the smallest and most notable woman of the district, the
daughter of a certain poor farmer. He was so poor that he could not
afford properly to dower his daughter, who had in consequence remained
single beyond her first youth. Everybody felt sure that Managing Molly
must now be married to the Ogre. The tall girls stretched themselves
till they looked like maypoles, and said, "Poor thing!" The slatterns
gossiped from house to house, the heels of their shoes clacking as
they went, and cried that this was what came of being too thrifty.
And sure enough, in due time, the giant widower came to the farmer as
he was in the field looking over his crops, and proposed for Molly
there and then. The farmer was so much put out that he did not know
what he said in reply, either when he was saying it, or afterwards,
when his friends asked about it. But he remembered that the Ogre had
invited himself to sup at the farm that day week.
Managing Molly did not distress herself at the news.
"Do what I bid you, and say as I say," said she to her father, "and if
the Ogre does not change his mind, at any rate you shall not come
empty-handed out of the business."
By his daughter's desire the farmer now procured a large number of
hares, and a barrel of white wine, which expenses completely emptied
his slender stocking, and on the day of the Ogre's visit, she made a
delicious and savoury stew with the hares in the biggest pickling tub,
and the wine-barrel was set on a bench near the table.
When the Ogre came, Molly served up the stew, and the Ogre sat down to
sup, his head just touching the kitchen rafters. The stew was perfect,
and there was plenty of it. For what Molly and her father ate was
hardly to be counted in the tubful. The Ogre was very much pleased,
and said politely:
"I'm afraid, my dear, that you have been put to great trouble and
expense on my account, I have a large appetite, and like to sup well."
"Don't mention it, sir," said Molly. "The fewer rats the more corn.
How do you cook them?"
"Not one of all the extravagant hussies I have had as wives ever
cooked them at all," said the Ogre; and he thought to himself, "Such a
stew out of rats! What frugality! What a housewife!"
When he broached the wine, he was no less pleased, for it was of the
best.
"This, at any rate, must have cost you a great deal, neighbour," said
he, drinking the farmer's health as Molly left the room.
"I don't know that rotten apples could be better used," said the
farmer; "but I leave all that to Molly. Do you brew at home?"
"We give our rotten apples to the pigs," growled the Ogre. "But
things will be better ordered when she is my wife."
The Ogre was now in great haste to conclude the match, and asked what
dowry the farmer would give his daughter.
"I should never dream of giving a dowry with Molly," said the farmer,
boldly. "Whoever gets her, gets dowry enough. On the contrary, I shall
expect a good round sum from the man who deprives me of her. Our
wealthiest farmer is just widowed, and therefore sure to be in a
hurry for marriage. He has an eye to the main chance, and would not
grudge to pay well for such a wife, I'll warrant."
"I'm no churl myself," said the Ogre, who was anxious to secure his
thrifty bride at any price; and he named a large sum of money,
thinking, "We shall live on rats henceforward, and the beef and mutton
will soon cover the dowry."
"Double that, and we'll see," said the farmer, stoutly.
But the Ogre became angry, and cried; "What are you thinking of, man?
Who is to hinder my carrying your lass off, without 'with your leave'
or 'by your leave,' dowry or none?"
"How little you know her!" said the farmer. "She is so firm that she
would be cut to pieces sooner than give you any benefit of her thrift,
unless you dealt fairly in the matter."
"Well, well," said the Ogre, "let us meet each other." And he named a
sum larger than he at first proposed, and less than the farmer had
asked. This the farmer agreed to, as it was enough to make him
prosperous for life.
"Bring it in a sack to-morrow morning," said he to the Ogre, "and then
you can speak to Molly; she's gone to bed now."
The next morning, accordingly, the Ogre appeared, carrying the dowry
in a sack, and Molly came to meet him.
"There are two things," said she, "I would ask of any lover of mine: a
new farmhouse, built as I should direct, with a view to economy; and a
feather-bed of fresh goose feathers, filled when the old woman plucks
her geese. If I don't sleep well, I cannot work well."
"That is better than asking for finery," thought the Ogre; "and after
all the house will be my own." So, to save the expense of labour, he
built it himself, and worked hard, day after day, under Molly's
orders, till winter came. Then it was finished.
"Now for the feather-bed," said Molly. "I'll sew up the ticking, and
when the old woman plucks her geese, I'll let you know."
When it snows, they say the old woman up yonder is plucking her geese,
and so at the first snowstorm Molly sent for the Ogre.
"Now you see the feathers falling," said she, "so fill the bed."
"How am I to catch them?" cried the Ogre.
"Stupid! don't you see them lying there in a heap?" cried Molly; "get
a shovel, and set to work."
The Ogre accordingly carried in shovelfuls of snow to the bed, but as
it melted as fast as he put it in, his labour never seemed done.
Towards night the room got so cold that the snow would not melt, and
now the bed was soon filled.
Molly hastily covered it with sheets and blankets, and said: "Pray
rest here to-night, and tell me if the bed is not comfort itself.
To-morrow we will be married."
So the tired Ogre lay down on the bed he had filled, but, do what he
would, he could not get warm.
"The sheets must be damp," said he, and in the morning he woke with
such horrible pains in his bones that he could hardly move, and half
the bed had melted away. "It's no use," he groaned, "she's a very
managing woman, but to sleep on such a bed would be the death of me."
And he went off home as quickly as he could, before Managing Molly
could call upon him to be married; for she was so managing that he was
more than half afraid of her already.
When Molly found that he had gone, she sent the farmer after him.
"What does he want?" cried the Ogre, when they told him the farmer was
at the door.
"He says the bride is waiting for you," was the reply.
"Tell him I'm too ill to be married," said the Ogre.
But the messenger soon returned:
"He says she wants to know what you will give her to make up for the
disappointment."
"She's got the dowry, and the farm, and the feather-bed," groaned the
Ogre; "what more does she want?"
But again the messenger returned:
"She says you've pressed the feather-bed flat, and she wants some more
goose feathers."
"There are geese enough in the yard," yelled the Ogre, "Let him drive
them home; and if he has another word to say, put him down to roast."
The farmer, who overheard this order, lost no time in taking his
leave, and as he passed through the yard he drove home as fine a flock
of geese as you will see on a common.
It is said that the Ogre never recovered from the effects of sleeping
on the old woman's goose feathers, and was less powerful than before.
As for Managing Molly, being now well dowered, she had no lack of
offers of marriage, and was soon mated to her mind.
THE MAGICIANS' GIFTS.
There was once a king in whose dominions lived no less than three
magicians.
When the king's eldest son was christened, the king invited the three
magicians to the christening feast, and to make the compliment the
greater, he asked one of them to stand godfather. But the other two,
who were not asked to be godfathers, were so angry at what they held
to be a slight, that they only waited to see how they might best
revenge themselves upon the infant prince.
When the moment came for presenting the christening gifts, the
godfather magician advanced to the cradle and said, "My gift is this:
Whatever he wishes for he shall have. And only I who give shall be
able to recall this gift." For he perceived the jealousy of the other
magicians, and knew that, if possible, they would undo what he did.
But the second magician muttered in his beard, "And yet I will change
it to a curse." And coming up to the cradle, he said, "The wishes
that he has thus obtained he shall not be able to revoke or change."
Then the third magician grumbled beneath his black robe, "If he were
very wise and prudent he might yet be happy. But I will secure his
punishment." So he also drew near to the cradle, and said, "For my
part, I give him a hasty temper."
After which, the two dissatisfied magicians withdrew together, saying,
"Should we permit ourselves to be slighted for nothing?"
But the king and his courtiers were not at all disturbed.
"My son has only to be sure of what he wants," said the king, "and
then, I suppose, he will not desire to recall his wishes."
And the courtiers added, "If a prince may not have a hasty temper, who
may, we should like to know?"
And everybody laughed, except the godfather magician, who went out
sighing and shaking his head, and was seen no more.
Whilst the king's son was yet a child, the gift of the godfather
magician began to take effect. There was nothing so rare and precious
that he could not obtain it, or so difficult that it could not be
accomplished by his mere wish. But, on the other hand, no matter how
inconsiderately he spoke, or how often he changed his mind, what he
had once wished must remain as he had wished it, in spite of himself;
and as he often wished for things that were bad for him, and oftener
still wished for a thing one day and regretted it the next, his power
was the source of quite as much pain as pleasure to him. Then his
temper was so hot, that he was apt hastily to wish ill to those who
offended him, and afterwards bitterly to regret the mischief that he
could not undo. Thus, one after another, the king appointed his
trustiest counsellors to the charge of his son, who, sooner or later,
in the discharge of their duty, were sure to be obliged to thwart him;
on which the impatient prince would cry, "I wish you were at the
bottom of the sea with your rules and regulations;" and the
counsellors disappeared accordingly, and returned no more.
When there was not a wise man left at court, and the king himself
lived in daily dread of being the next victim, he said, "Only one
thing remains to be done: to find the godfather magician, and persuade
him to withdraw his gift."
So the king offered rewards, and sent out messengers in every
direction, but the magician was not to be found. At last, one day he
met a blind beggar, who said to him, "Three nights ago I dreamed that
I went by the narrowest of seven roads to seek what you are looking
for, and was successful."
When the king returned home, he asked his courtiers, "Where are there
seven roads lying near to each other, some broad, and some narrow?"
And one of them replied, "Twenty-one miles to the west of the palace
is a four-cross road, where three field-paths also diverge."
To this place the king made his way, and taking the narrowest of the
field-paths, went on and on till it led him straight into a cave,
where an old woman sat over a fire.
"Does a magician live here?" asked the king.
"No one lives here but myself," said the old woman. "But as I am a
wise woman I may be able to help you if you need it."
The king then told her of his perplexities, and how he was desirous of
finding the magician, to persuade him to recall his gift.
"He could not recall the other gifts," said the wise woman. "Therefore
it is better that the prince should be taught to use his power
prudently and to control his temper. And since all the persons capable
of guiding him have disappeared, I will return with you and take
charge of him myself. Over me he will have no power."
To this the king consented, and they returned together to the palace,
where the wise woman became guardian to the prince, and she fulfilled
her duties so well that he became much more discreet and
self-controlled. Only at times his violent temper got the better of
him, and led him to wish what he afterwards vainly regretted.
Thus all went well till the prince became a man, when, though he had
great affection for her, he felt ashamed of having an old woman for
his counsellor, and he said, "I certainly wish that I had a faithful
and discreet adviser of my own age and sex."
On that very day a young nobleman offered himself as companion to the
prince, and as he was a young man of great ability, he was accepted:
whereupon the old woman took her departure, and was never seen again.
The young nobleman performed his part so well that the prince became
deeply attached to him, and submitted in every way to his counsels.
But at last a day came when, being in a rage, the advice of his friend
irritated him, and he cried hastily, "Will you drive me mad with your
long sermons? I wish you would hold your tongue for ever." On which
the young nobleman became dumb, and so remained. For he was not, as
the wise woman had been, independent of the prince's power.
The prince's grief and remorse knew no bounds. "Am I not under a
curse?" said he. "Truly I ought to be cast out from human society, and
sent to live with wild beasts in a wilderness. I only bring evil upon
those I love best--indeed, there is no hope for me unless I can find
my godfather, and make him recall this fatal gift."
So the prince mounted his horse, and, accompanied by his dumb friend,
who still remained faithful to him, he set forth to find the magician.
They took no followers, except the prince's dog, a noble hound, who
was so quick of hearing that he understood all that was said to him,
and was, next to the young nobleman, the wisest person at court.
"Mark well, my dog," said the prince to him, "we stay nowhere till we
find my godfather, and when we find him we go no further. I rely on
your sagacity to help us."
The dog licked the prince's hand, and then trotted so resolutely down
a certain road that the two friends allowed him to lead them and
followed close behind.
They travelled in this way to the edge of the king's dominions, only
halting for needful rest and refreshment. At last the dog led them
through a wood, and towards evening they found themselves in the
depths of the forest, with no sign of any shelter for the night.
Presently they heard a little bell, such as is rung for prayer, and
the dog ran down a side path and led them straight to a kind of
grotto, at the door of which stood an aged hermit.
"Does a magician live here?" asked the prince.
"No one lives here but myself," said the hermit, "but I am old, and
have meditated much. My advice is at your service if you need it."
The prince then related his history, and how he was now seeking the
magician godfather, to rid himself of his gift.
"And yet that will not cure your temper," said the hermit. "It were
better that you employed yourself in learning to control that, and to
use your power prudently."
"No, no," replied the prince; "I must find the magician."
And when the hermit pressed his advice, he cried, "Provoke me not,
good father, or I may be base enough to wish you ill; and the evil I
do I cannot undo."
And he departed, followed by his friend, and calling his dog. But the
dog seated himself at the hermit's feet, and would not move. Again and
again the prince called him, but he only whined and wagged his tail,
and refused to move. Coaxing and scolding were both in vain, and when
at last the prince tried to drag him off by force, the dog growled.
"Base brute!" cried the prince, flinging him from him in a transport
of rage. "How have I been so deceived in you? I wish you were hanged!"
And even as he spoke the dog vanished, and as the prince turned his
head he saw the poor beast's body dangling from a tree above him. The
sight overwhelmed him, and he began bitterly to lament his cruelty.
"Will no one hang me also," he cried, "and rid the world of such a
monster?"
"It is easier to die repenting than to live amending," said the
hermit; "yet is the latter course the better one. Wherefore abide with
me, my son, and learn in solitude those lessons of self-government
without which no man is fit to rule others."
"It is impossible," said the prince. "These fits of passion are as a
madness that comes upon me, and they are beyond cure. It only remains
to find my godfather, that he may make me less baneful to others by
taking away the power I abuse." And raising the body of the dog
tenderly in his arms, he laid it before him on his horse, and rode
away, the dumb nobleman following him.
They now entered the dominions of another king, and in due time
arrived at the capital. The prince presented himself to the king, and
asked if he had a magician in his kingdom.
"Not to my knowledge," replied the king. "But I have a remarkably wise
daughter, and if you want counsel she may be able to help you."
The princess accordingly was sent for, and she was so beautiful, as
well as witty, that the prince fell in love with her, and begged the
king to give her to him to wife. The king, of course, was unable to
refuse what the prince wished, and the wedding was celebrated without
delay; and by the advice of his wife the prince placed the body of his
faithful dog in a glass coffin, and kept it near him, that he might
constantly be reminded of the evil results of giving way to his anger.
For a time all went well. At first the prince never said a harsh word
to his wife; but by and by familiarity made him less careful, and one
day she said something that offended him, and he fell into a violent
rage. As he went storming up and down, the princess wrung her hands,
and cried, "Ah, my dear husband, I beg of you to be careful what you
say to me. You say you loved your dog, and yet you know where he
lies."
"I know that I wish you were with him, with your prating!" cried the
prince, in a fury; and the words were scarcely out of his mouth when
the princess vanished from his side, and when he ran to the glass
coffin, there she lay, pale and lifeless, with her head upon the body
of the hound.
The prince was now beside himself with remorse and misery, and when
the dumb nobleman made signs that they should pursue their search for
the magician, he only cried, "Too late! too late!"
But after a while he said, "I will return to the hermit, and pass the
rest of my miserable life in solitude and penance. And you, dear
friend, go back to my father."
But the dumb nobleman shook his head, and could not be persuaded to
leave the prince. Then they took the glass coffin on their shoulders,
and on foot, and weeping as they went, they retraced their steps to
the forest.
For some time the prince remained with the hermit, and submitted
himself to his direction. Then the hermit bade him return to his
father, and he obeyed.
Every day the prince stood by the glass coffin, and beat his breast
and cried, "Behold, murderer, the fruits of anger!" And he tried hard
to overcome the violence of his temper. When he lost heart he
remembered a saying of the hermit: "Patience had far to go, but she
was crowned at last." And after a while the prince became as gentle as
he had before been violent. And the king and all the court rejoiced
at the change; but the prince remained sad at heart, thinking of the
princess.
One day he was sitting alone, when a man approached him, dressed in a
long black robe.
"Good-day, godson," said he.
"Who calls me godson?" said the prince.
"The magician you have so long sought," said the godfather. "I have
come to reclaim my gift."
"What cruelty led you to bestow it upon me?" asked the prince.
"The king, your father, would have been dissatisfied with any ordinary
present from me," said the magician, "forgetting that the
responsibilities of common gifts, and very limited power, are more
than enough for most men to deal with. But I have not neglected you. I
was the wise woman who brought you up. Again, I was the hermit, as
your dog was sage enough to discover. I am come now to reclaim what
has caused you such suffering."
"Alas!" cried the prince, "why is your kindness so tardy? If you have
not forgotten me, why have you withheld this benefit till it is too
late for my happiness? My friend is dumb, my wife is dead, my dog is
hanged. When wishes cannot reach these, do you think it matters to me
what I may command?"
"Softly, prince," said the magician; "I had a reason for the delay.
But for these bitter lessons you would still be the slave of the
violent temper which you have conquered, and which, as it was no gift
of mine, I could not remove. Moreover, when the spell which made all
things bend to your wish is taken away, its effects also are undone.
Godson! I recall my gift."
As the magician spoke the glass sides of the coffin melted into the
air, and the princess sprang up, and threw herself into her husband's
arms. The dog also rose, stretched himself, and wagged his tail. The
dumb nobleman ran to tell the good news to the king, and all the
counsellors came back in a long train from the bottom of the sea, and
set about the affairs of state as if nothing had happened.
The old king welcomed his children with open arms, and they all lived
happily to the end of their days.
THE WIDOWS AND THE STRANGERS.
In days of yore, there were once two poor old widows who lived in the
same hamlet and under the same roof. But though the cottages joined
and one roof covered them, they had each a separate dwelling; and
although they were alike in age and circumstances, yet in other
respects they were very different. For one dame was covetous, though
she had little to save, and the other was liberal, though she had
little to give.
Now, on the rising ground opposite to the widows' cottages, stood a
monastery where a few pious and charitable brethren spent their time
in prayer, labour, and good works. And with the alms of these monks,
and the kindness of neighbours, and because their wants were few, the
old women dwelt in comfort, and had daily bread, and lay warm at
One evening, when the covetous old widow was having supper, there came
a knock at her door. Before she opened it she hastily put away the
remains of her meal.
"For," said she, "it is a stormy night, and ten to one some belated
vagabond wants shelter; and when there are victuals on the table every
fool must be asked to sup."
But when she opened the door, a monk came in who had his cowl pulled
over his head to shelter him from the storm. The widow was much
disconcerted at having kept one of the brotherhood waiting, and loudly
apologized, but the monk stopped her, saying, "I fear I cut short your
evening meal, my daughter."
"Now in the name of ill-luck, how came he to guess that?" thought the
widow, as with anxious civility she pressed the monk to take some
supper after his walk; for the good woman always felt hospitably
inclined towards any one who was likely to return her kindness
sevenfold.
The brother, however, refused to sup; and as he seated himself the
widow looked sharply through her spectacles to see if she could gather
from any distention of the folds of his frock whether a loaf, a bottle
of cordial, or a new winter's cloak were most likely to crown the
visit. No undue protuberance being visible about the monk's person,
she turned her eyes to his face, and found that her visitor was one of
the brotherhood whom she had not seen before. And not only was his
face unfamiliar, it was utterly unlike the kindly but rough
countenances of her charitable patrons. None that she had ever seen
boasted the noble beauty, the chiselled and refined features of the
monk before her. And she could not but notice that, although only one
rushlight illumined her room, and though the monk's cowl went far to
shade him even from that, yet his face was lit up as if by light from
within, so that his clear skin seemed almost transparent. In short,
her curiosity must have been greatly stirred, had not greed made her
more anxious to learn what he had brought than who he was.
"It's a terrible night," quoth the monk, at length. "Such tempest
without only gives point to the indoor comforts of the wealthy; but it
chills the very marrow of the poor and destitute."
"Aye, indeed," sniffed the widow, with a shiver. "If it were not for
the charity of good Christians, what would poor folk do for comfort on
such an evening as this?"
"It was that very thought, my daughter," said the monk, with a sudden
earnestness on his shining face, "that brought me forth even now
through the storm to your cottage."
"Heaven reward you!" cried the widow, fervently.
"Heaven does reward the charitable!" replied the monk. "To no truth do
the Scriptures bear such constant and unbroken witness; even as it is
written: 'He that hath pity upon the poor lendeth unto the Lord; and
look, what he layeth out it shall be paid him again.'"
"What a blessed thing it must be to be able to do good!" sighed the
widow, piously wishing in her heart that the holy man would not delay
to earn his recompense.
"My daughter," said the monk, "that blessing is not withheld from you.
It is to ask your help for those in greater need than yourself that I
am come to-night." And forthwith the good brother began to tell how
two strangers had sought shelter at the monastery. Their house had
been struck by lightning, and burnt with all it contained; and they
themselves, aged, poor, and friendless, were exposed to the fury of
the storm. "Our house is a poor one," continued the monk. "The
strangers' lodging room was already full, and we are quite without the
means of making these poor souls comfortable. You at least have a
sound roof over your head, and if you can spare one or two things for
the night, they shall be restored to you to-morrow, when some of our
guests depart."
The widow could hardly conceal her vexation and disappointment. "Now,
dear heart, holy father!" cried she, "is there not a rich body in the
place, that you come for charity to a poor old widow like me, that am
in a case rather to borrow myself than to lend to others?"
"Can you spare us a blanket?" said the monk. "These poor strangers
have been out in the storm, remember."
The widow started. "What meddling busybody told him that the Baroness
gave me a new blanket at Michaelmas?" thought she; but at last, very
unwillingly, she went to an inner room to fetch a blanket from her
bed.
"They shan't have the new one, that's flat," muttered the widow; and
she drew out the old one and began to fold it up. But though she had
made much of its thinness and insufficiency to the Baroness, she was
so powerfully affected at parting with it, that all its good qualities
came strongly to her mind.
"It's a very suitable size," she said to herself, "and easy for my
poor old arms to shake or fold. With careful usage, it would last for
years yet; but who knows how two wandering bodies that have been
tramping miles through the storm may kick about in their sleep? And
who knows if they're decent folk at all? likely enough they're two
hedge birds, who have imposed a pitiful tale on the good fathers, and
never slept under anything finer than a shock of straw in their
lives."
The more the good woman thought of this, the more sure she felt that
such was the case, and the less willing she became to lend her blanket
to "a couple of good-for-nothing tramps." A sudden idea decided her.
"Ten to one they bring fever with them!" she cried; "and dear knows I
saw enough good bedding burnt after the black fever, three years ago!
It would be a sin and a shame to burn a good blanket like this." And
repeating "a sin and a shame" with great force, the widow restored the
blanket to its place.
"The coverlet's not worth much," she thought; "but my goodman bought
it the year after we were married, and if anything happened to it I
should never forgive myself. The old shawl is good enough for tramps."
Saying which she took a ragged old shawl from a peg, and began to fold
it up. But even as she brushed and folded, she begrudged the faded
rag.
"It saves my better one on a bad day," she sighed; "but I suppose the
father must have something."
And accordingly she took it to the monk, saying, "It's not so good as
it has been, but there's warmth in it yet, and it cost a pretty penny
when new."
"And is this all that you can spare to the poor houseless strangers?"
asked the monk.
"Aye, indeed, good father," said she, "and that will cost me many a
twinge of rheumatics. Folk at my age can't lie cold at night for
nothing."
"These poor strangers," said the monk, "are as aged as yourself, and
have lost everything."
But as all he said had no effect in moving the widow's compassion, he
departed, and knocked at the door of her neighbour. Here he told the
same tale, which met with a very different hearing. This widow was one
of those liberal souls whose possessions always make them feel uneasy
unless they are being accepted, or used, or borrowed by some one else.
She blessed herself that, thanks to the Baroness, she had a new
blanket fit to lend to the king himself, and only desired to know with
what else she could serve the poor strangers and requite the charities
of the brotherhood.
The monk confessed that all the slender stock of household goods in
the monastery was in use, and one after another he accepted the loan
of almost everything the widow had. As she gave the things he put them
out through the door, saying that he had a messenger outside; and
having promised that all should be duly restored on the morrow, he
departed, leaving the widow with little else than an old chair in
which she was to pass the night.
When the monk had gone, the storm raged with greater fury than before,
and at last one terrible flash of lightning struck the widows' house,
and though it did not hurt the old women, it set fire to the roof,
and both cottages were soon ablaze. Now as the terrified old creatures
hobbled out into the storm, they met the monk, who, crying, "Come to
the monastery!" seized an arm of each, and hurried them up the hill.
To such good purpose did he help them, that they seemed to fly, and
arrived at the convent gate they hardly knew how.
Under a shed by the wall were the goods and chattels of the liberal
widow.
"Take back thine own, daughter," said the monk; "thy charity hath
brought its own reward."
"But the strangers, good father?" said the perplexed widow.
"Ye are the strangers," answered the monk; "and what thy pity thought
meet to be spared for the unfortunate, Heaven in thy misfortune hath
spared to thee."
Then turning to the other widow, he drew the old shawl from beneath
his frock, and gave it to her, saying, "I give you joy, dame, that
this hath escaped the flames. It is not so good as it has been; but
there is warmth in it yet, and it cost a pretty penny when new."
Full of confusion, the illiberal widow took back her shawl, murmuring,
"Lack-a-day! If I had but known it was ourselves the good father
meant!"
The monk gave a shrewd smile.
"Aye, aye, it would have been different, I doubt not," said he; "but
accept the lesson, my daughter, and when next thou art called upon to
help the unfortunate, think that it is thine own needs that would be
served; and it may be thou shalt judge better as to what thou canst
spare."
As he spoke, a flash of lightning lit up the ground where the monk
stood, making a vast aureole about him in the darkness of the night.
In the bright light, his countenance appeared stern and awful in its
beauty, and when the flash was passed, the monk had vanished also.
Furthermore, when the widows sought shelter in the monastery, they
found that the brotherhood knew nothing of their strange visitor.
KIND WILLIAM AND THE WATER SPRITE.
There once lived a poor weaver, whose wife died a few years after
their marriage. He was now alone in the world except for their child,
who was a very quick and industrious little lad, and, moreover, of
such an obliging disposition that he gained the nickname of Kind
William.
On his seventh birthday his father gave him a little net with a long
handle, and with this Kind William betook himself to a shallow part of
the river to fish. After wandering on for some time, he found a quiet
pool dammed in by stones, and here he dipped for the minnows that
darted about in the clear brown water. At the first and second casts
he caught nothing, but with the third he landed no less than
twenty-one little fishes, and such minnows he had never seen, for as
they leaped and struggled in the net they shone with alternate tints
of green and gold.
He was gazing at them with wonder and delight, when a voice behind
him cried, in piteous tones--
"Oh, my little sisters! Oh, my little sisters!"
Kind William turned round, and saw, sitting on a rock that stood out
of the stream, a young girl weeping bitterly. She had a very pretty
face, and abundant yellow hair of marvellous length, and of such
uncommon brightness that even in the shade it shone like gold. She was
dressed in grass green, and from her knees downwards she was hidden by
the clumps of fern and rushes that grew by the stream.
"What ails you, my little lass?" said Kind William.
But the maid only wept more bitterly, and wringing her hands,
repeated, "Oh, my little sisters! Oh, my little sisters!" presently
adding in the same tone, "The little fishes! Oh, the little fishes!"
"Dry your eyes, and I will give you half of them," said the
good-natured child; "and if you have no net you shall fish with me
this afternoon."
But at this proposal the maid's sobs redoubled, and she prayed and
begged with frantic eagerness that he would throw the fish back into
the river. For some time Kind William would not consent to throw away
his prize, but at last he yielded to her excessive grief, and emptied
the net into the pool, where the glittering fishes were soon lost to
sight under the sand and pebbles.
The girl now laughed and clapped her hands.
"This good deed you shall never rue, Kind William," said she, "and
even now it shall repay you threefold. How many fish did you catch?"
"Twenty-one," said Kind William, not without regret in his tone.
The maid at once began to pull hairs out of her head, and did not stop
till she had counted sixty-three, and laid them together in her
fingers. She then began to wind the lock up into a curl, and it took
far longer to wind than the sixty-three hairs had taken to pull. How
long her hair really was Kind William never could tell, for after it
reached her knees he lost sight of it among the fern; but he began to
suspect that she was no true village maid, but a water sprite, and he
heartily wished himself safe at home.
"Now," said she, when the lock was wound, "will you promise me three
things?"
"If I can do so without sin," said Kind William.
"First," she continued, holding out the lock of hair, "will you keep
this carefully, and never give it away? It will be for your own good."
"One never gives away gifts," said Kind William, "I promise that."
"The second thing is to spare what you have spared. Fish up the river
and down the river at your will, but swear never to cast net in this
pool again."
"One should not do kindness by halves," said Kind William. "I promise
that also."
"Thirdly, you must never tell what you have now seen and heard till
thrice seven years have passed. And now come hither, my child, and
give me your little finger, that I may see if you can keep a secret."
But by this time Kind William's hairs were standing on end, and he
gave the last promise more from fear than from any other motive, and
seized his net to go.
"No hurry, no hurry," said the maiden (and the words sounded like the
rippling of a brook over pebbles). Then bending towards him, with a
strange smile, she added, "You are afraid that I shall pinch too hard,
my pretty boy. Well, give me a farewell kiss before you go."
"I kiss none but the miller's lass," said Kind William, sturdily; for
she was his little sweetheart. Besides, he was afraid that the water
witch would enchant him and draw him down. At his answer she laughed
till the echoes rang, but Kind William shuddered to hear that the
echoes seemed to come from the river instead of from the hills; and
they rang in his ears like a distant torrent leaping over rocks.
"Then listen to my song," said the water sprite. With which she drew
some of her golden hairs over her arm, and tuning them as if they had
been the strings of a harp, she began to sing:
    "Warp of woollen and woof of gold:
    When seven and seven and seven are told."
But when Kind William heard that the river was running with the
cadence of the tune, he could bear it no longer, and took to his
heels. When he had run a few yards he heard a splash, as if a salmon
had jumped, and on looking back he found that the yellow-haired maiden
was gone.
Kind William was trustworthy as well as obliging, and he kept his
word. He said nothing of his adventure. He put the yellow lock into an
old china teapot that had stood untouched on the mantelpiece for
years. And fishing up the river and down the river he never again cast
net into the haunted pool. And in course of time the whole affair
passed from his mind.
Fourteen years went by, and Kind William was Kind William still. He
was as obliging as ever, and still loved the miller's daughter, who,
for her part, had not forgotten her old playmate. But the miller's
memory was not so good, for the fourteen years had been prosperous
ones with him, and he was rich, whereas they had only brought bad
trade and poverty to the weaver and his son. So the lovers were not
allowed even to speak to each other.
One evening Kind William wandered by the river-side lamenting his hard
fate. It was his twenty-first birthday, and he might not even receive
the good wishes of the day from his old playmate. It was just growing
dusk, a time when prudent bodies hurry home from the neighbourhood of
fairy rings, sprite-haunted streams, and the like, and Kind William
was beginning to quicken his pace, when a voice from behind him sang:
Kind William felt sure that he had heard this before, though he could
not recall when or where; but suspecting that it was no mortal voice
that sang, he hurried home without looking behind him. Before he
reached the house he remembered all, and also that on this very day
his promise of secrecy expired.
Meanwhile the old weaver had been sadly preparing the loom to weave a
small stock of yarn, which he had received in payment for some work.
He had set up the warp, and was about to fill the shuttle, when his
son came in and told the story, and repeated the water sprite's song.
"Where is the lock of hair, my son?" asked the old man.
"In the teapot still, if you have not touched it," said Kind William;
"but the dust of fourteen years must have destroyed all gloss and
colour."
On searching the teapot, however, the lock of hair was found to be as
bright as ever, and it lay in the weaver's hand like a coil of gold.
"It is the song that puzzles me," said Kind William. "Seven, and
seven, and seven make twenty-one. Now that is just my age."
"There is your warp of woollen, if that is anything," added the
weaver, gazing at the loom with a melancholy air.
"And this is golden enough," laughed Kind William, pointing to the
curl. "Come, father, let us see how far one hair will go on the
shuttle." And suiting the action to the word, he began to wind. He
wound the shuttle full, and then sat down to the loom and began to
throw.
The result was a fabric of such beauty that the Weavers shouted with
amazement, and one single hair served for the woof of the whole piece.
Before long there was not a town dame or a fine country lady but must
needs have a dress of the new stuff, and before the sixty-three hairs
were used up, the fortunes of the weaver and his son were made.
About this time the miller's memory became clearer, and he was often
heard to speak of an old boy-and-girl love between his dear daughter
and the wealthy manufacturer of the golden cloth. Within a year and a
day Kind William married his sweetheart, and as money sticks to money,
in the end he added the old miller's riches to his own.
Moreover there is every reason to believe that he and his wife lived
And what became of the water sprite?
That you must ask somebody else, for I do not know.
MURDOCH'S RATH[8].
[Footnote 8: Rath = a kind of moat-surrounded spot much favoured by
Irish fairies. The ditch is generally overgrown with furze-bushes.]
There was not a nicer boy in all Ireland than Pat, and clever at his
trade too, if only he'd had one.
But from his cradle he learned nothing (small blame to him with no one
to teach him!), so when he came to years of discretion, he earned his
living by running messages for his neighbours; and Pat could always be
trusted to make the best of a bad bargain, and bring back all the
change, for he was the soul of honesty and good-nature.
It's no wonder then that he was beloved by every one, and got as much
work as he could do, and if the pay had but fitted the work, he'd have
been mighty comfortable; but as it was, what he got wouldn't have kept
him in shoe-leather, but for making both ends meet by wearing his
shoes in his pocket, except when he was in the town, and obliged to
look genteel for the credit of the place he came from.
Well, all was going on as peaceable as could be, till one market-day,
when business (or it may have been pleasure) detained him till the
heel of the evening, and by nightfall, when he began to make the road
short in good earnest, he was so flustered, rehearsing his messages to
make sure he'd forgotten nothing, that he never bethought him to leave
off his brogues, but tramped on just as if shoe-leather were made to
be knocked to bits on the king's highway.
And this was what he was after saying:
"A dozen hanks of grey yarn for Mistress Murphy."
"Three gross of bright buttons for the tailor."
"Half an ounce of throat drops for Father Andrew, and an ounce of
snuff for his housekeeper," and so on.
For these were what he went to the town to fetch, and he was afraid
lest one of the lot might have slipped his memory.
Now everybody knows there are two ways home from the town; and that's
not meaning the right way and the wrong way, which my grandmother
(rest her soul!) said there was to every place but one that it's not
genteel to name. (There could only be a wrong way there, she said.)
The two ways home from the town were the highway, and the way by
Murdoch's Rath.
Murdoch's Rath was a pleasant enough spot in the daytime, but not
many persons cared to go by it when the sun was down. And in all the
years Pat was going backwards and forwards, he never once came home
except by the high-road till this unlucky evening, when, just at the
place where the two roads part, he got, as one may say, into a sort of
"Halt!" says he to himself (for his own uncle had been a soldier, and
Pat knew the word of command). "The left-hand turn is the right one,"
says he, and he was going down the high-road as straight as he could
go, when suddenly he bethought himself. "And what am I doing?" he
says. "This was my left hand going to town, and how in the name of
fortune could it be my left going back, considering that I've turned
round? It's well that I looked into it in time." And with that he went
off as fast down the other road as he started down this.
But how far he walked he never could tell, before all of a sudden the
moon shone out as bright as day, and Pat found himself in Murdoch's
Rath.
And this was the smallest part of the wonder; for the Rath was full of
fairies.
When Pat got in they were dancing round and round till his feet
tingled to look at them, being a good dancer himself. And as he sat on
the side of the Rath, and snapped his fingers to mark the time, the
dancing stopped, and a little man comes up, in a black hat and a green
coat, with white stockings, and red shoes on his feet.
"Won't you take a turn with us, Pat?" says he, bowing till he nearly
touched the ground. And, indeed, he had not far to go, for he was
barely two feet high.
"Don't say it twice, sir," says Pat. "It's myself will be proud to
foot the floor wid ye;" and before you could look round, there was Pat
in the circle dancing away for bare life.
At first his feet felt like feathers for lightness, and it seemed as
if he could have gone on for ever. But at last he grew tired, and
would have liked to stop, but the fairies would not, and so they
danced on and on. Pat tried to think of something good to say, that
he might free himself from the spell, but all he could think of was:
"A dozen hanks of grey yarn for Missis Murphy."
And it seemed to Pat that the moon was on the one side of the Rath
when they began to dance, and on the other side when they left off;
but he could not be sure after all that going round. One thing was
plain enough. He danced every bit of leather off the soles of his
feet, and they were blistered so that he could hardly stand; but all
the little folk did was to stand and hold their sides with laughing at
At last the one who spoke before stepped up to him, and--"Don't break
your heart about it, Pat," says he; "I'll lend you my own shoes till
the morning, for you seem to be a good-natured sort of a boy."
Well, Pat looked at the fairy man's shoes, that were the size of a
baby's, and he looked at his own feet; but not wishing to be uncivil,
"Thank ye kindly, sir," says he. "And if your honour 'll be good
enough to put them on for me, maybe you won't spoil the shape." For he
thought to himself, "Small blame to me if the little gentleman can't
get them to fit."
With that he sat down on the side of the Rath, and the fairy man put
on the shoes for him, and no sooner did they touch Pat's feet, than
they became altogether a convenient size, and fitted him like wax.
And, more than that, when he stood up, he didn't feel his blisters at
all.
"Bring 'em back to the Rath at sunrise, Pat, my boy," says the little
And as Pat was climbing over the ditch, "Look round, Pat," says he.
And when Pat looked round, there were jewels and pearls lying at the
roots of the furze-bushes on the ditch, as thick as peas.
"Will you help yourself, or take what's given ye, Pat?" says the fairy
"Did I ever learn manners?" says Pat. "Would you have me help myself
before company? I'll take what your honour pleases to give me, and be
The fairy man picked a lot of yellow furze-blossoms from the bushes,
and filled Pat's pockets.
"Keep 'em for love, Pat, me darlin'," says he.
Pat would have liked some of the jewels, but he put the furze-blossoms
by for love.
"Good-evening to your honour," says he.
"And where are you going, Pat, dear?" says the fairy man.
"I'm going home," says Pat. And if the fairy man didn't know where
that was, small blame to him.
"Just let me dust them shoes for ye, Pat," says the fairy man. And as
Pat lifted up each foot he breathed on it, and dusted it with the tail
of his green coat.
"Home!" says he, and when he let go, Pat was at his own doorstep
before he could look round, and his parcels safe and sound with him.
Next morning he was up with the sun, and carried the fairy man's
shoes back to the Rath. As he came up, the little man looked over the
ditch.
"The top of the morning to, your honour," says Pat; "here's your
shoes."
"You're an honest boy, Pat," says the little gentleman. "It's
inconvenienced I am without them, for. I have but the one pair. Have
you looked at the yellow flowers this morning?" he says.
"I have not, sir," says Pat; "I'd be loth to deceive you. I came off
as soon as I was up."
"Be sure to look when you get back, Pat," says the fairy man, "and
good luck to ye."
With which he disappeared, and Pat went home. He looked for the
furze-blossoms, as the fairy man told him, and there's not a word of
truth in this tale if they weren't all pure gold pieces.
Well, now Pat was so rich, he went to the shoemaker to order another
pair of brogues, and being a kindly, gossiping boy, the shoemaker soon
learned the whole story of the fairy man and the Rath. And this so
stirred up the shoemaker's greed that he resolved to go the very next
night himself, to see if he could not dance with the fairies, and have
like luck.
He found his way to the Rath all correct, and sure enough the fairies
were dancing, and they asked him to join. He danced the soles off his
brogues, as Pat did, and the fairy man lent him his shoes, and sent
him home in a twinkling.
As he was going over the ditch, he looked round, and saw the roots of
the furze-bushes glowing with precious stones as if they had been
glow-worms.
"Will you help yourself, or take what's given ye?" said the fairy man.
"I'll help myself, if you please," said the cobbler, for he
thought--"If I can't get more than Pat brought home, my fingers must
all be thumbs."
So he drove his hand into the bushes, and if he didn't get plenty, it
wasn't for want of grasping.
When he got up in the morning, he went straight to the jewels. But not
a stone of the lot was more precious than roadside pebbles. "I ought
not to look till I come from the Rath," said he. "It's best to do like
Pat all through."
But he made up his mind not to return the fairy man's shoes.
"Who knows the virtue that's in them?" he said. So he made a small
pair of red leather shoes, as like them as could be, and he blacked
the others upon his feet, that the fairies might not know them, and at
sunrise he went to the Rath.
The fairy man was looking over the ditch as before.
"Good-morning to you," said he.
"The top of the morning to you, sir," said the cobbler; "here's your
shoes." And he handed him the pair that he had made, with a face as
grave as a judge.
The fairy man looked at them, but he said nothing, though he did not
put them on.
"Have you looked at the things you got last night?" says he.
"I'll not deceive you, sir," says the cobbler. "I came off as soon as
I was up. Sorra peep I took at them."
"Be sure to look when you get back," says the fairy man. And just as
the cobbler was getting over the ditch to go home, he says:
"If my eyes don't deceive me," says he, "there's the least taste in
life of dirt on your left shoe. Let me dust it with the tail of my
coat."
"That means home in a twinkling," thought the cobbler, and he held up
his foot.
The fairy man dusted it, and muttered something the cobbler did not
hear. Then, "Sure," says he, "it's the dirty pastures that you've come
through, for the other shoe's as bad."
So the cobbler held up his right foot, and the fairy man rubbed that
with the tail of his green coat.
When all was done the cobbler's feet seemed to tingle, and then to
itch, and then to smart, and then to burn. And at last he began to
dance, and he danced all round the Rath (the fairy man laughing and
holding his sides), and then round and round again. And he danced till
he cried out with weariness, and tried to shake the shoes off. But
they stuck fast, and the fairies drove him over, the ditch, and
through the prickly furze-bushes, and he danced away. Where he danced
to, I cannot tell you. Whether he ever got rid of the fairy shoes, I
do not know. The jewels never were more than wayside pebbles, and they
were swept out when his cabin was cleaned, which was not too soon, you
may be sure.
All this happened long ago; but there are those who say that the
covetous cobbler dances still, between sunset and sunrise, round
THE LITTLE DARNER.
In days gone by there lived a poor widow who had brought up her only
child so well that the little lass was more helpful and handy than
many a grown-up person.
When other women's children were tearing and dirtying their clothes,
clamouring at their mothers' skirts for this and that, losing and
breaking and spoiling things, and getting into mischief of all kinds,
the widow's little girl, with her tiny thimble on her finger, could
patch quite neatly. She was to be trusted to put anything in its
proper place, and when meals were over she would stand on a little
stool at the table washing up the dishes. Moreover, she could darn
stockings so well that the darn looked like a part of the stocking.
The slatternly mothers, who spoiled and scolded their children by
turns, and had never taught them to be tidy and obedient, used often
to quote the widow's little girl to their troublesome brats, and say,
"Why don't you help your mother as the widow's daughter helps her?"
Thus it came about that the helpless, useless, untidy little girls
hated the very name of the widow's daughter, because they were always
being told of her usefulness and neatness.
Now the widow's child often earned a few pence by herding sheep or
pigs for the farmers, or by darning stockings for their wives, and as
she could be trusted, people were very glad to employ her. One day she
was keeping watch over five little pigs in a field, and, not to waste
time, was darning a pair of stockings as well, when some of the little
girls who had a spite against her resolved to play her a trick.
Near the field where the little maid and the pigs were there was a
wood, into which all children were strictly forbidden to go. For in
the depths of the wood there lived a terrible Ogre and Ogress, who
kidnapped all children who strayed near their dwelling. Every morning
the Ogre threw a big black bag over his shoulder, and stalked through
the forest, making the ground shake as he walked. If he found any
truant children he popped them into his bag, and when he got home his
wife cooked them for supper.
The trick played upon the widow's daughter was this. Five little girls
came up to the field where she was herding the five little pigs, and
each chasing a pig, they drove them into the Ogre's wood. In vain the
little maid called to her flock; the pigs ran in a frightened troop
into the wood, and she ran after them. When the five little girls saw
that she had got them together again, they ran in to chase them away
once more, and so they were all in the wood together, when the ground
shook under them, upsetting the six little girls and the five little
pigs; and as they rolled over the Ogre picked them up, and put them
one after another into his bag.
When they were jolting about with the pigs in the poke as the Ogre
strode homewards, the five spiteful children were as sorry as you
please; and as the pigs were always fighting and struggling to get to
the top, they did not escape without some scratches. And their
screams, and the squealing of the little pigs made such a noise that
the Ogre's wife heard it a mile and a half away in the depths of the
wood; and she lighted a fire under the copper, and filled it with
water, ready to cook whatever her husband brought home.
As for the widow's little daughter she pulled her needle-book from her
pocket, and every now and then she pushed a needle through the sack,
that it might fall on the ground, and serve as a guide if she should
ever have the chance of finding her way home again.
When the Ogre arrived, he emptied the sack, and sent the six little
girls and the five little pigs all sprawling on to the floor, saying:
"These will last us some time. Cook the fattest, and put the rest
into the cellar. And whilst you get dinner ready, I will take another
stroll with the bag. Luck seldom comes singly."
When he had gone, the Ogress looked over the children, and picked out
the widow's daughter, saying:
"You look the most good-humoured. And the best-tempered always make
the best eating."
So she set her down on a stool by the fire till the water should boil,
and locked the others up in the cellar.
"Tears won't put the fire out," thought the little maid. So instead of
crying she pulled out the old stocking, and went on with her darning.
When the Ogress came back from the cellar she went up to her and
looked at her work.
"How you darn!" she cried. "Now that's a sort of thing I hate. And the
Ogre does wear such big holes in his stockings, and his feet are so
large, that, though my hand is not a small one, I cannot fill out the
heel with my fist, and then who's to darn it neatly I should like to
know?"
"If I had a basin big enough to fill out the heel, I think I could do
it," said the little maid.
The Ogress scratched her big ear thoughtfully for a minute, and then
she said:
"To lose a chance is to cheat oneself. Why shouldn't this one darn
while the others boil? Yes, I think you shall try. Six days ought to
serve for mending all the stockings, though the Ogre hasn't a whole
pair left, and angry enough he'll be. And when household matters are
not to his mind he puts that big sack over my head, and ties it round
my neck. And if you had ever done housework with your head in a poke,
you'd know what it is! So you shall darn the stockings, and if you do
them well, I'll cook one of the others first instead of you."
Saying which, the Ogress fetched one of the Ogre's stockings, and the
widow's child put a big basin into the heel to stretch it, and began
to darn. The Ogress watched her till she had put all the threads one
way, and when she began to run the cross threads, interlacing them
with the utmost exactness, the old creature was delighted, and went to
fetch another child to be cooked instead of the widow's.
When the other little girl came up, she cried and screamed so that the
room rang with her lamentations, and the widow's child laid down her
needle and ceased working.
"Why don't you go on darning?" asked the Ogress.
"Alas! dear mother," said she, "the little sister's cries make my
heart beat so that I cannot darn evenly."
"Then she must go back to the cellar for a bit," said the Ogress.
"And meanwhile I'll sharpen the knife."
So after she had taken back the crying child, and had watched the
little girl, who now darned away as skilfully as ever, the Ogress took
down a huge knife from the wall, and began to sharpen it on a
grindstone in a corner of the kitchen. As she sharpened the knife, she
glanced from time to time at the little maid, and soon perceived that
she had once more ceased working.
"Alas! dear mother," said the child, "when I hear you sharpening that
terrible knife my hands tremble so that I cannot thread my needle."
"Well, it will do now," growled the Ogress, feeling the edge of the
blade with her horny finger; and, having seen the darning-needle once
more at work, she went to fetch up one of the children. As she went,
she hummed what cookmaids sing--
    "Dilly, dilly duckling, come and be killed!"
But it sounded like the wheezing and groaning of a heavy old door upon
its rusty hinges.
When she came in, with the child in one hand, and the huge knife in
the other, she went up to the little darner to look at her work. The
heel of the Ogre's stocking was exquisitely mended, all but seven
threads; but the little maid sat idle with her hands before her.
"Alas! dear mother," was the reply, "when I think of my little
playmate about to die, the tears blind my eyes, so that I cannot see
what stitches I take. Wherefore I beg of you, dear mother, to cook one
of the little pigs instead, that I may be able to go on with my work,
and that a pair of stockings may be ready to-morrow morning when the
Ogre will ask for them; so my playmate's life will be spared, and your
head will not be put into a poke."
At first the Ogress would not hear of such a thing, but at last she
consented, and made a stew of one of the little pigs instead of
cooking the little girl.
"But supposing the Ogre goes to count the children," said she; "he
will find one too many."
"Then let her go, dear mother," said the widow's daughter; "she will
find her way home, and you will never be blamed."
"But she must stir the stew with her forefinger first," said the
Ogress, "that it may have a human flavour."
So the little girl had to stir the hot stew with her finger, which
scalded it badly; and then she was set at liberty, and ran home as
hard as she could; and as the little maid's needles sparkled here and
there on the path, she had no difficulty in finding her way.
The Ogre was quite contented with his dinner, and the Ogress got great
praise for the way in which she had darned his stockings. Thus it went
on for four days more. As the widow's little girl wouldn't work if her
companions were killed, the Ogress cooked the pigs one after another,
and the children were all sent away with burnt forefingers.
When the fifth had been dismissed, and all the pigs were eaten, the
Ogress said:
"To-morrow you will have to be stewed, and now I wish I had kept one
of the others that I might have saved you altogether to work for me.
However, there is one comfort, the stockings are finished."
But meanwhile the other children had got safely home, and had told
their tale. And all the men of the place set off at once to attack the
Ogre, and release the widow's child. Guided by the needles, they
arrived just as the Ogress was sharpening the big knife for the last
time.
So they killed the Ogre and his wife, and took the industrious little
maid back to her mother.
The other little girls were now very repentant; and when their
fingers were well, they all learned to darn stockings at once.
And as there was now no danger about going into the wood, it was no
longer forbidden. And this being the case, the children were much less
anxious to play there than formerly.
THE FIDDLER IN THE FAIRY RING.
Generations ago, there once lived a farmer's son, who had no great
harm in him, and no great good either. He always meant well, but he
had a poor spirit, and was too fond of idle company.
One day his father sent him to market with some sheep for sale, and
when business was over for the day, the rest of the country-folk made
ready to go home, and more than one of them offered the lad a lift in
his cart.
"Thank you kindly, all the same," said he, "but I am going back across
the downs with Limping Tim."
Then out spoke a steady old farmer and bade the lad go home with the
rest, and by the main road. For Limping Tim was an idle, graceless
kind of fellow, who fiddled for his livelihood, but what else he did
to earn the money he squandered, no one knew. And as to the sheep path
over the downs, it stands to reason that the highway is better
travelling after sunset, for the other is no such very short cut; and
has a big fairy ring so near it, that a butter-woman might brush it
with the edge of her market cloak, as she turned the brow of the hill.
But the farmer's son would go his own way, and that was with Limping
Tim, and across the downs.
So they started, and the fiddler had his fiddle in his hand, and a
bundle of marketings under his arm, and he sang snatches of strange
songs, the like of which the lad had never heard before. And the moon
drew out their shadows over the short grass till they were as long as
the great stones of Stonehenge.
At last they turned the hill, and the fairy ring looked dark under the
moon, and the farmer's son blessed himself that they were passing it
quietly, when Limping Tim suddenly pulled his cloak from his back, and
handing it to his companion, cried, "Hold this for a moment, will you?
I'm wanted. They're calling for me."
"I hear nothing," said the farmer's son. But before he had got the
words out of his mouth, the fiddler had completely disappeared. He
shouted aloud, but in vain, and had begun to think of proceeding on
his way, when the fiddler's voice cried, "Catch!" and there came,
flying at him from the direction of the fairy ring, the bundle of
marketings which the fiddler had been carrying.
"It's in my way," he then heard the fiddler cry. "Ah, this is dancing!
Come in, my lad, come in!"
But the farmer's son was not totally without prudence, and he took
good care to keep at a safe distance from the fairy ring.
"Come back, Tim! Come back!" he shouted, and, receiving no answer, he
adjured his friend to break the bonds that withheld him, and return to
the right way, as wisely as one man can counsel another.
After talking for some time to no purpose, he again heard his friend's
voice, crying, "Take care of it for me! The money dances out of my
pocket." And therewith the fiddler's purse was hurled to his feet,
where it fell with a heavy chinking of gold within.
He picked it up, and renewed his warnings and entreaties, but in vain;
and, after waiting for a long time, he made the best of his way home
alone, hoping that the fiddler would follow, and come to reclaim his
property.
The fiddler never came. And when at last there was a fuss about his
disappearance, the farmer's son, who had but a poor spirit, began to
be afraid to tell the truth of the matter. "Who knows but they may
accuse me of theft?" said he. So he hid the cloak, and the bundle,
and the money-bag in the garden.
But when three months passed, and still the fiddler did not return, it
was whispered that the farmer's son had been his last companion; and
the place was searched, and they found the cloak, and the bundle, and
the money-bag and the lad was taken to prison.
Now, when it was too late, he plucked up a spirit, and told the truth;
but no one believed him, and it was said that he had murdered the
fiddler for the sake of his money and goods. And he was taken before
the judge, found guilty, and sentenced to death.
Fortunately, his old mother was a Wise Woman. And when she heard that
he was condemned, she said, "Only follow my directions, and we may
save you yet; for I guess how it is."
So she went to the judge, and begged for her son three favours before
his death.
"I will grant them," said the judge, "if you do not ask for his life."
"The first," said the old woman, "is, that he may choose the place
where the gallows shall be erected; the second, that he may fix the
hour of his execution; and the third favour is, that you will not fail
to be present."
"I grant all three," said the judge. But when he learned that the
criminal had chosen a certain hill on the downs for the place of
execution, and an hour before midnight for the time, he sent to beg
the sheriff to bear him company on this important occasion.
The sheriff placed himself at the judge's disposal, but he commanded
the attendance of the gaoler as some sort of protection; and the
gaoler, for his part, implored his reverence the chaplain to be of the
party, as the hill was not in good spiritual repute. So, when the time
came, the four started together, and the hangman and the farmer's son
went before them to the foot of the gallows.
Just as the rope was being prepared, the farmer'a son called to the
judge, and said, "If your Honour will walk twenty paces down the hill,
to where you will see a bit of paper, you will learn the fate of the
fiddler."
"That is, no doubt, a copy of the poor man's last confession," thought
the judge.
"Murder will out, Mr. Sheriff," said he; and in the interests of truth
and justice he hastened to pick up the paper.
But the farmer's son had dropped it as he came along, by his mother's
direction, in such a place that the judge could not pick it up without
putting his foot on the edge of the fairy ring. No sooner had he done
so than he perceived an innumerable company of little people dressed
in green cloaks and hoods, who were dancing round in a circle as wide
as the ring itself.
They were all about two feet high, and had aged faces, brown and
withered, like the knots on gnarled trees in hedge bottoms, and they
squinted horribly; but, in spite of their seeming age, they flew round
and round like children.
"Mr. Sheriff! Mr. Sheriff!" cried the judge, "come and see the
dancing. And hear the music, too, which is so lively that it makes the
soles of my feet tickle."
"There is no music, my Lord Judge," said the sheriff, running down the
hill. "It is the wind whistling over the grass that your lordship
hears."
But when the sheriff had put his foot by the judge's foot, he saw and
heard the same, and he cried out, "Quick, Gaoler, and come down! I
should like you to be witness to this matter. And you may take my arm,
Gaoler, for the music makes me feel unsteady."
"There is no music, sir," said the gaoler; "but your worship doubtless
hears the creaking of the gallows."
But no sooner had the gaoler's feet touched the fairy ring, than he
saw and heard like the rest, and he called lustily to the chaplain to
come and stop the unhallowed measure.
"It is a delusion of the Evil One," said the parson; "there is not a
sound in the air but the distant croaking of some frogs." But when he
too touched the ring, he perceived his mistake.
At this moment the moon shone out, and in the middle of the ring they
saw Limping Tim the fiddler, playing till great drops stood out on his
forehead, and dancing as madly as he played.
"Ah, you rascal!" cried the judge. "Is this where you've been all the
time, and a better man than you as good as hanged for you? But you
shall come home now."
Saying which, he ran in, and seized the fiddler by the arm, but
Limping Tim resisted so stoutly that the sheriff had to go to the
judge's assistance, and even then the fairies so pinched and hindered
them that the sheriff was obliged to call upon the gaoler to put his
arms about his waist, who persuaded the chaplain to add his strength
to the string. But as ill luck would have it, just as they were
getting off, one of the fairies picked up Limping Tim's fiddle, which
had fallen in the scuffle, and began to play. And as he began to play,
every one began to dance--the fiddler, and the judge, and the sheriff,
and the gaoler, and even the chaplain.
"Hangman! hangman!" screamed the judge, as he lifted first one leg and
then the other to the tune, "come down, and catch hold of his
reverence the chaplain. The prisoner is pardoned, and he can lay hold
too."
The hangman knew the judge's voice, and ran towards it; but as they
were now quite within the ring he could see nothing, either of him or
his companions.
The farmer's son followed, and warning the hangman not to touch the
ring, he directed him to stretch his hands forwards in hopes of
catching hold of some one. In a few minutes the wind blew the
chaplain's cassock against the hangman's fingers, and he caught the
parson round the waist. The farmer's son then seized him in like
fashion, and each holding firmly by the other, the fiddler, the judge,
the sheriff, the gaoler, the parson, the hangman, and the farmer's son
all got safely out of the charmed circle.
"Oh, you scoundrel!" cried the judge to the fiddler; "I have a very
good mind to hang you up on the gallows without further ado."
But the fiddler only looked like one possessed, and upbraided the
farmer's son for not having the patience to wait three minutes for
"Three minutes!" cried he; "why, you've been here three months and a
day."
This the fiddler would not believe, and as he seemed in every way
beside himself, they led him home, still upbraiding his companion,
and crying continually for his fiddle.
His neighbours watched him closely, but one day he escaped from their
care and wandered away over the hills to seek his fiddle, and came
back no more.
His dead body was found upon the downs, face downwards, with the
fiddle in his arms. Some said he had really found the fiddle where he
had left it, and had been lost in a mist, and died of exposure. But
others held that he had perished differently, and laid his death at
the door of the fairy dancers.
As to the farmer's son, it is said that thenceforward he went home
from market by the high-road, and spoke the truth straight out, and
was more careful of his company.
"I WON'T."
"Don't Care"--so they say--fell into a goose-pond; and "I won't" is
apt to come to no better an end. At least, my grandmother tells me
that was how the Miller had to quit his native town, and leave the tip
of his nose behind him.
It all came of his being allowed to say "I won't" when he was quite a
little boy. His mother thought he looked pretty when he was pouting,
and that wilfulness gave him an air which distinguished him from other
people's children. And when she found out that his lower lip was
becoming so big that it spoilt his beauty, and that his wilfulness
gained his way twice and stood in his way eight times out of ten, it
was too late to alter him.
Then she said, "Dearest Abinadab, do be more obliging!"
And he replied (as she had taught him), "I won't."
He always took what he could get, and would neither give nor give up
to other people. This, he thought, was the way to get more out of life
than one's neighbours.
Amongst other things, he made a point of taking the middle of the
footpath.
"Will you allow me to pass you, sir?--I am in a hurry," said a voice
behind him one day.
"I won't," said Abinadab; on which a poor washerwoman, with her
basket, scrambled down into the road, and Abinadab chuckled.
Next day he was walking as before.
behind him.
"I won't," said Abinadab. On which he was knocked into the ditch; and
the Baron walked on, and left him to get out of the mud on whichever
side he liked.
He quarrelled with his friends till he had none left, and he
quarrelled with the tradesmen of the town till there was only one who
would serve him, and this man offended him at last.
"I'll show you who's master!" said the Miller. "I won't pay a penny of
your bill--not a penny."
"Sir," said the tradesman, "my giving you offence now, is no just
reason why you should refuse to pay for what you have had and been
satisfied with. I must beg you to pay me at once."
"I won't," said the Miller, "and what I say I mean. I won't; I tell
you, I won't."
So the tradesman summoned him before the Justice, and the Justice
condemned him to pay the bill and the costs of the suit.
"I won't," said the Miller.
So they put him in prison, and in prison he would have remained if his
mother had not paid the money to obtain his release. By and by she
died, and left him her blessing and some very good advice, which (as
is sometimes the case with bequests) would have been more useful if it
had come earlier.
The Miller's mother had taken a great deal of trouble off his hands
which now fell into them. She took in all the small bags of grist
which the country-folk brought to be ground, and kept account of them,
and spoke civilly to the customers, big and little. But these small
matters irritated the Miller.
"I may be the slave of all the old women in the country-side," said
he; "but I won't--they shall see that I won't."
So he put up a notice to say that he would only receive grist at a
certain hour on certain days. Now, but a third of the old women could
read the notice, and they did not attend to it. People came as before;
but the Miller locked the door of the mill and sat in the
counting-house and chuckled.
"My good friend," said his neighbours, "you can't do business in this
way. If a man lives by trade, he must serve his customers. And a
Miller must take in grist when it comes to the mill."
"Others may if they please," said the Miller; "but I won't. When I
make a rule, I stick to it."
"Take advice, man, or you'll be ruined," said his friends.
In a few weeks all the country-folk turned their donkeys' heads
towards the windmill on the heath. It was a little farther to go, but
the Windmiller took custom when it came to him, gave honest measure,
and added civil words gratis.
The other Miller was ruined.
"All you can do now is to leave the mill while you can pay the rent,
and try another trade," said his friends.
"I won't," said the Miller. "Shall I be turned out of the house where
I was born, because the country-folk are fools?"
However, he could not pay the rent, and the landlord found another
tenant.
"You must quit," said he to the Miller.
"That I won't," said the Miller, "not for fifty new tenants."
So the landlord sent for the constables, and he was carried out,
which is not a dignified way of changing one's residence. But then it
is not easy to be obstinate and dignified at the same time.
His wrath against the landlord knew no bounds.
"Was there ever such a brute?" he cried. "Would any man of spirit hold
his home at the whim of a landlord? I'll never rent another house as
long as I live."
"But you must live somewhere," said his friends.
He was no longer a young man, and the new tenant pitied him.
"The poor old fellow is out of his senses," he said. And he let him
sleep in one of his barns. One of the mill cats found out that there
was a new warm bed in this barn, and she came and lived there too, and
kept away the mice.
One night, however, Mrs. Pussy disturbed the Miller's rest. She was in
and out of the window constantly, and meowed horribly into the
bargain.
"It seems a man can't even sleep in peace," said the Miller. "If this
happens again, you'll go into the mill-race to sing to the fishes."
The next night the cat was still on the alert, and the following
morning the Miller tied a stone round her neck, and threw her into the
"Oh, spare the poor thing, there's a good soul," said a bystander.
"I won't," said the Miller. "I told her what would happen."
When his back was turned, however, the bystander got Pussy out, and
took her home with him.
Now the cat was away, the mice could play; and they played hide-and
seek over the Miller's nightcap.
It came to such a pass that there was no rest to be had.
"I won't go to bed, I declare I won't," said the Miller. So he sat up
all night in an arm-chair, and threw everything he could lay his hands
on at the corners where he heard the mice scuffling, till the place
was topsy-turvy.
Towards morning he lit a candle and dressed himself. He was in a
terrible humour; and when he began to shave, his hand shook and he cut
himself. The draughts made the flame of the candle unsteady too, and
the shadow of the Miller's nose (which was a large one) fell in
uncertain shapes upon his cheeks, and interfered with the progress of
the razor. At first he thought he would wait till daylight. Then his
temper got the better of him.
"I won't," he said, "I won't; why should I?"
So he began again. He held on by his nose to steady his cheeks, and
he gave it such a spiteful pinch that the tears came into his eyes.
"Matters have come to a pretty pass, when a man's own nose is to stand
in his light," said he.
By and by a gust of wind came through the window. Up flared the
candle, and the shadow of the Miller's nose danced half over his face,
and the razor gashed his chin.
Transported with fury, he struck at it before he could think what he
was doing. The razor was very sharp, and the tip of the Miller's nose
came off as clean as his whiskers.
When daylight came, and he saw himself in the glass, he resolved to
leave the place.
"I won't stay here to be a laughing-stock," said he.
As he trudged out on to the highway, with his bundle on his back, the
Baron met him and pitied him. He dismounted from his horse, and
leading it up to the Miller, he said:
"Friend, you are elderly to be going far afoot. I will lend you my
mare to take you to your destination. When you are there, knot the
reins and throw them on her shoulder, saying, 'Home!' She will then
return to me. But mark one thing,--she is not used to whip or spur.
Humour her, and she will carry you well and safely."
The Miller mounted willingly enough, and set forward. At first the
mare was a little restive. The Miller had no spurs on, but, in spite
of the Baron's warning, he kicked her with his heels. On this, she
danced till the Miller's hat and bundle flew right and left, and he
was very near to following them.
"Ah, you vixen!" he cried. "You think I'll humour you as the Baron
does. But I won't--no, you shall see that I won't!" And gripping his
walking-stick firmly in his hand, he belaboured the Baron's mare as if
she had been a donkey.
On which she sent the Miller clean over her head, and cantered back to
the castle; and wherever it was that he went to, he had to walk.
He never returned to his native village, and everybody was glad to be
rid of him. One must bear and forbear with his neighbours, if he hopes
to be regretted when he departs.
But my grandmother says that long after the mill had fallen into ruin,
the story was told as a warning to wilful children of the Miller who
cut off his nose to spite his own face.
THE MAGIC JAR.
There was once a young fellow whom fortune had blessed with a good
mother, a clever head, and a strong body. But beyond this she had not
much favoured him; and though able and willing to work, he had often
little to do, and less to eat. But his mother had taught him to be
contented with his own lot, and to feel for others. Moreover, from her
he inherited a great love for flowers.
One day, when his pockets were emptiest, a fair was held in the
neighbouring town, and he must needs go as well as the rest, though he
had no money to spend. But he stuck a buttercup in his cap, for which
he had nothing to pay, and strode along as merrily as the most.
Towards evening some of the merrymakers became riotous; and a party of
them fell upon an old Jew who was keeping a stall of glass and china,
and would smash his stock. Now as the Jew stood before his booth
beseeching them to spare his property, up came the strong young man,
with the flower still unwithered in his cap, and he took the old Jew's
part and defended him. For from childhood his mother had taught him to
feel for others.
So those who would have ill-treated the old Jew now moved off, and the
young man stayed with him till he had packed up his wares.
Then the Jew turned towards him and said, "My son, he who delivers the
oppressed, and has respect unto the aged, has need of no reward, for
the blessing of Him that blesseth is about him. Nevertheless, that I
may not seem ungrateful, choose, I pray thee, one of these china jars;
and take it to thee for thine own. If thou shalt choose well, it may
be of more use to thee than presently appears."
Thereupon the young man examined the jars, which were highly
ornamented with many figures and devices; but he chose one that was
comparatively plain; only it had a bunch of flowers painted on the
front, round which was a pretty device in spots or circles of gold.
Then said the Jew, "My son, why have you chosen this jar, when there
are others so much finer?"
The young man said, "Because the flowers please me, and I have a love
for flowers."
Then said the Jew, "Happy is he whose tastes are simple! Moreover,
herein is a rare wisdom, and thou hast gained that which is the most
valuable of my possessions. This jar has properties which I will
further explain to thee. It was given to me by a wise woman, subject
to this condition, that I must expose it for sale from sunrise to
sunset at the yearly fair. When I understood this I took counsel with
myself how I should preserve it; and I bought other china jars of more
apparent value, and I marked them all with the same price. For I said
within myself, 'There is no man who does not desire to get as much as
he can for his money, therefore, from its contrast with these others,
my jar is safe.' And it was even so; for truly, many have desired to
buy the jar because of the delicate beauty of the flowers, if I would
have sold it for less than others which seemed more valuable."
"Many times it has been almost gone, but when I have shown the others
at the same price, my customers have reviled me, saying, 'Dog of a
Jew, dost thou ask as much for this as for these others Which are
manifestly worth double?' and they have either departed, cursing me,
and taking nothing; or they have bought one of the more richly
decorated jars at the same price. For verily in most men the spirit of
covetousness is stronger than the love of beauty, and they rather
desire to get much for their money, than to obtain that which is
suitable and convenient."
"But in thee, O young man! I have beheld a rare wisdom. To choose that
which is good in thine eyes, and suitable to thy needs, rather than
that which satisfieth the lust of over-reaching; and lo! what I have
so long kept from thousands, has become thine!"
Then the young man wished to restore to the Jew the jar he valued so
highly, and to choose another.
But the Jew refused, saying, "A gift cannot be recalled. Moreover, I
will now explain to thee its uses. Within the jar lies a toad, whose
spit is poison. But it will never spit at its master. Every evening
thou must feed it with bread and milk, when it will fall asleep; and
at sunrise in the morning it will awake and breathe heavily against
the side of the jar, which will thus become warm. As it warms the
flowers will blossom out, and become real, and full of perfume, and
thou wilt be able to pluck them without diminishing their number.
Moreover, these twelve round spots of gold will drop off, and become
twelve gold pieces, which will be thine. And thus it will be every
day. Only thou must thyself rise with the sun, and gather the flowers
and the gold with thine own hands. Furthermore, when the jar cools,
the flowers and gilding will be as before. Fare thee well."
And even as he spoke the Jew lifted the huge crate of china on to his
back, and disappeared among the crowd.
All came about as the Jew had promised. As he had twelve gold pieces a
day, the young man now wanted for nothing, besides which he had fresh
flowers on his table all the year round.
Now it is well said, "Thy business is my business, and the business of
all beside;" for every man's affairs are his neighbours' property.
Thus it came about that all those who lived near the young man were
perplexed that he had such beautiful flowers in all seasons; and
esteemed it as an injury to themselves that he should have them and
give no explanation as to whence they came.
At last it came to the ears of the king, and he also was disturbed.
For he was curious, and fond of prying into small matters; a taste
which ill becomes those of high position. But the king had no child to
succeed him; and he was always suspecting those about him of plotting
to obtain the crown, and thus he came to be for ever prying into the
affairs of his subjects.
Now when he heard of the young man who had flowers on his table all
the year round, he desired one of his officers to go and question him
as to how he obtained them. But the young man contrived to evade his
questions, and the matter was at rest for a while.
Then the king sent another messenger, with orders to press the young
man more closely; and because the young man disdained to tell a lie,
he said, "I get the flowers from yon china jar."
Then the messenger returned, and said to the king, "The young man says
that he gets the flowers from a certain china jar which stands in his
room."
Then said the king, "Bring the contents of the jar hither to me." And
the messenger returned and brought the toad.
But when the king laid hold upon the toad, it spat in his face; and he
was poisoned and died.
Then the toad sat upon the king's mouth, and would not be enticed
away. And every one feared to touch it because it spat poison. And
they called the wise men of the council; and they performed certain
rites to charm away the toad, and yet it would not go.
But after three days, the master of the toad came to the palace, and
without saying who he was, he desired to be permitted to try and get
the toad from the corpse of the king.
And when he was taken into the king's chamber, he stood and beckoned
to the toad, saying, "The person of the king and the bodies of the
dead are sacred, wherefore come away."
And the toad crawled from the king's face and came to him, and did not
spit at him; and he put it back into the jar.
Then said the wise men, "There is no one so fit to succeed to the
kingdom as this man is; both for wisdom of speech and for the power of
command."
And what they said pleased the people; and the young man was made
king. And in due time he married an amiable and talented princess, and
had children. And he ruled the kingdom well and wisely, and was
beloved till his death.
Now when, after the lapse of many years, he died, there was great
grief among the people, and his body was laid out in his own room, and
the people were permitted to come and look upon his face for the last
And among the crowd there appeared an aged Jew. And he did not weep as
did the others; but he came and stood by the bier, and gazed upon the
face of the dead king in silence. And after a while he exclaimed, and
"Oh, wonderful spectacle! A man, and not covetous. A ruler, and not
oppressive. Contented in poverty, and moderate in wealth. Elect of the
people, and beloved to the end!"
And when he had said this, he again became silent, and stood as one
And no one knew when he came in, nor perceived when he departed.
But when they came to search for the china jar, it was gone, and could
never afterwards be found.
THE FIRST WIFE'S WEDDING-RING.
Many years ago, there lived a certain worthy man who was twice
married. By his first wife he had a son, who soon after his mother's
death resolved to become a soldier, and go to foreign lands. "When one
has seen the world, one values home the more," said he; "and if I live
I shall return."
So the father gave him a blessing, and his mother's wedding-ring,
saying, "Keep this ring, and then, however long you stay away, and
however changed you may become, by this token I shall know you to be
my true son and heir."
In a short time the father married again, and by this marriage also he
had one son.
Years passed by, and the elder brother did not return, and at last
every one believed him to be dead. But in reality he was alive, and
after a long time he turned his steps homewards. He was so much
changed by age and travelling that only his mother would have known
him again, but he had the ring tied safe and fast round his neck. One
night, however, he was too far from shelter to get a bed, so he slept
under a hedge, and when he woke in the morning the string was untied
and the ring was gone. He spent a whole day in searching for it, but
in vain; and at last he resolved to proceed and explain the matter to
his father.
The old man was overjoyed to see him, and fully believed his tale, but
with the second wife it was otherwise. She was greatly displeased to
think that her child was not now to be the sole heir of his father's
goods; and she so pestered and worked upon the old man by artful and
malicious speeches, that he consented to send away the new-comer till
he should have found the first wife's wedding-ring.
"Is the homestead I have taken such care of," she cried, "to go to the
first vagrant who comes in with a brown face and a ragged coat,
pretending that he is your son?"
So the soldier was sent about his business; but his father followed
him to the gate, and slipped some money into his hand, saying, "God
speed you back again with the ring!"
It was Sunday morning, and the bells were ringing for service as he
turned sadly away.
"Ding, dong!" rang the bells, "ding, dong! Why do you not come to
church like others? Why are you not dressed in your Sunday clothes,
and wherefore do you heave such doleful sighs, whilst we ring merrily?
Ding, dong! ding, dong!"
"Is there not a cause?" replied the soldier. "This day I am turned out
of home and heritage, though indeed I am the true heir."
"Nevertheless we shall ring for your return," said the bells.
As he went, the sun shone on the green fields, and in the soldier's
eyes, and said, "See how brightly I shine! But you, comrade, why is
your face so cloudy?"
"Is there not good reason?" replied he. "This day I am turned out of
home and heritage, and yet I am the true heir."
"Nevertheless I shall shine on your return," said the sun.
Along the road the hawthorn hedges were white with blossom. "Heyday!"
they cried, "who is this that comes trimp tramp, with a face as long
as a poplar-tree? Cheer up, friend! It is spring! sweet spring! All is
now full of hope and joy, and why should you look so sour?"
"May I not be excused?" said the soldier. "This day I am turned out,
of home and heritage, and yet I am the true heir."
"Nevertheless we shall blossom when you return," said the hedges.
When he had wandered for three days and three nights, all he had was
spent, and there was no shelter to be seen but a dark gloomy forest,
which stretched before him. Just then he saw a small, weazened old
woman, who was trying to lift a bundle of sticks on to her back.
"That is too heavy for you, good mother," said the soldier; and he
raised and adjusted it for her.
"Have you just come here?" muttered the old crone; "then the best
thanks I can give you is to bid you get away as fast as you can."
"I never retreated yet, dame," said the soldier, and on he went.
Presently he met with a giant, who was strolling along by the edge of
the wood, knocking the cones off the tops of the fir-trees with his
finger-nails. He was an ill-favoured-looking monster, but he said,
civilly enough, "You look in want of employment, comrade. Will you
take service with me?"
"I must first know two things," answered the soldier; "my work and my
wages."
"Your work," said the giant, "is to cut a path through this wood to
the other side. But then you shall have a year and a day to do it in.
If you do it within the time, you will find at the other end a
magpie's nest, in which is the ring of which you are in search. The
nest also contains the crown jewels which have been stolen, and if you
take these to the king, you will need no further reward. But, on the
other hand, if the work is not done within the time, you will
thenceforth be my servant without wages."
"It is a hard bargain," said the soldier, "but need knows no law, and
I agree to the conditions."
When he came into the giant's abode, he was greatly astonished to see
the little weazened old woman. She showed no sign of recognizing him,
however, and the soldier observed a like discretion. He soon
discovered that she was the giant's wife, and much in dread of her
husband, who treated her with great cruelty.
"To-morrow you shall begin to work," said the giant.
"If you please," said the soldier, and before he went to bed he
carried in water and wood for the old woman.
"There's a kinship in trouble," said he.
Next morning the giant led him to a certain place on the outskirts of
the forest, and giving him an axe, said, "The sooner you begin, the
better, and you may see that it is not difficult." Saying which, he
took hold of one of the trees by the middle, and snapped it off as one
might pluck a flower.
"Thus to thee, but how to me?" said the soldier; and when the giant
departed he set to work. But although he was so strong, and worked
willingly, the trees seemed almost as hard as stone, and he made
little progress. When he returned at night the giant asked him how he
got on.
"The trees are very hard," said he.
"So they always say," replied the giant; "I have always had idle
servants."
"I will not be called idle a second time," thought the soldier, and
next day he went early and worked his utmost. But the result was very
small. And when he came home, looking weary and disappointed, he could
not fail to perceive that this gave great satisfaction to the giant.
Matters had gone on thus for some time, when one morning, as he went
to work, he found the little old woman gathering sticks as before.
"Listen," said she. "He shall not treat you as he has treated others.
Count seventy to the left from where you are working, and begin again.
But do not let him know that you have made a fresh start. And do a
little at the old place from time to time, as a blind." And before he
could thank her, the old woman was gone. Without more ado, however, he
counted seventy from the old place, and hit the seventieth tree such a
blow with his axe, that it came crashing down then and there. And he
found that, one after another, the trees yielded to his blows as if
they were touch-wood. He did a good day's work, gave a few strokes in
the old spot, and came home, taking care to look as gloomy as before.
Day by day he got deeper and deeper into the wood, the trees falling
before him like dry elder twigs; and now the hardest part of his work
was walking backwards and fowards to the giant's home, for the forest
seemed almost interminable. But on the three hundred and sixty-sixth
day from his first meeting with the giant, the soldier cut fairly
through on to an open plain, and as the light streamed in, a magpie
flew away, and on searching her nest, the soldier found his mother's
wedding-ring. He also found many precious stones of priceless value,
which were evidently the lost crown jewels. And as his term of service
with the giant was now ended, he did not trouble himself to return,
but with the ring and the jewels in his pocket set off to find his way
to the capital.
He soon fell in with a good-humoured, fellow who showed him the way,
and pointed out everything of interest on the road. As they drew near,
one of the royal carriages was driving out of the city gates, in which
sat three beautiful ladies who were the king's daughters.
"The two eldest are engaged to marry two neighbouring princes," said
the companion.
"And whom is the youngest to marry?" asked the soldier, "for she is by
far the most beautiful."
"She will never marry," answered his companion, "for she is pledged to
the man who shall find the crown jewels, and cut a path through the
stone-wood forest that borders the king's domains. And that is much as
if she were promised to the man who should fetch down the moon for her
to play with. For the jewels are lost beyond recall, and the wood is
an enchanted forest."
"Nevertheless she shall be wed with my mother's ring," thought the
soldier. But he kept his own counsel, and only waited till he had
smartened himself up, before he sought an audience of the king.
His claim to the princess was fully proved; the king heaped honours
and riches upon him; and he made himself so acceptable to his
bride-elect, that the wedding was fixed for an early day.
"May I bring my old father, madam?" he asked of the princess.
"That you certainly may," said she. "A good son makes a good husband."
As he entered his native village the hedges were in blossom, the sun
shone; and the bells rang for his return.
His stepmother now welcomed him, and was very anxious to go to court
also. But her husband said, "No. You took such good care of the
homestead, it is but fit you should look to it whilst I am away."
As to the giant, when he found that he had been outwitted, he went
off, and was never more heard of in those parts. But the soldier took
his wife into the city, and cared for her to the day of her death.
THE MAGICIAN TURNED MISCHIEF-MAKER.
There was once a wicked magician who prospered, and did much evil for
many years. But there came a day when Vengeance, disguised as a blind
beggar, overtook him, and outwitted him, and stole his magic wand.
With this he had been accustomed to turn those who offended him into
any shape he pleased; and now that he had lost it he could only
transform himself.
As Vengeance was returning to his place, he passed through a village,
the inhabitants of which had formerly lived in great terror of the
magician, and told them of the downfall of his power. But they only
said, "Blind beggars have long tongues. One must not believe all one
hears," and shrugged their shoulders, and left him.
Then Vengeance waved the wand and said, "As you have doubted me,
distress each other;" and so departed.
By and by he came to another village, and told the news. But here the
villagers were full of delight, and made a feast, and put the blind
beggar in the place of honour; who, when he departed, said, "As you
have done by me, deal with each other always!" and went on to the next
village.
In this place he was received with even warmer welcome; and when the
feast was over, the people brought him to the bridge which led out of
the village, and gave him a guide-dog to help him on his way.
Then the blind beggar waved the wand once more and said;
"Those who are so good to strangers must needs be good to each other.
But that nothing may be wanting to the peace of this place, I grant to
the beasts and birds in it that they may understand the language of
men."
Then he broke the wand in pieces, and threw it into the stream. And
when the people turned their heads back again from watching the bits
as they floated away, the blind beggar was gone.
Meanwhile the magician was wild with rage at the loss of his wand, for
all his pleasure was to do harm and hurt. But when he came to himself
he said: "One can do a good deal of harm with his tongue. I will turn
mischief-maker; and when the place is too hot to hold me, I can escape
in what form I please."
Then he came to the first village, where Vengeance had gone before,
and here he lived for a year and a day in various disguises; and he
made more misery with his tongue than he had ever accomplished in any
other year with his magic wand. For every one distrusted his
neighbour, and was ready to believe ill of him. So parents disowned
their children, and husband and wives parted, and lovers broke faith;
and servants and masters disagreed; and old friends became bitter
enemies, till at last the place was intolerable even to the magician,
and he changed himself into a cockchafer, and flew to the next
village, where, Vengeance had gone before.
Here also he dwelt for a year and a day, and then he left it because
he could do no harm. For those who loved each other trusted each
other, and the magician made mischief in vain. In one of his disguises
he was detected, and only escaped with his life from the enraged
villagers by changing himself into a cockchafer and flying on to the
next place, where Vengeance had gone before.
In this village he made less mischief than in the first, and more than
in the second. And he exercised all his art, and changed his disguises
constantly; but the dogs knew him under all.
One dog--the oldest dog in the place--was keeping watch over the
miller's house, when he saw the magician approaching, in the disguise
of an old woman.
"Do you see that old witch?" said he to the sparrows, who were picking
up stray bits of grain in the yard. "With her evil tongue she is
parting my master's daughter and the finest young fellow in the
country-side. She puts lies and truth together, with more skill than
you patch moss and feathers to build nests. And when she is asked
where she heard this or that, she says, 'A little bird told me so.'"
"We never told her," said the sparrows indignantly, "and if we had
your strength, Master Keeper, she should not malign us long!"
"I believe you are right!" said Master Keeper. "Of what avail is it
that we have learned the language of men, if we do not help them to
the utmost of our powers? She shall torment my young mistress no
more."
Saying which he flew upon the disguised magician as he entered the
gate, and would have torn him limb from limb, but that the
mischief-maker changed himself as before into a cockchafer, and flew
hastily from the village.
And thus he might doubtless have escaped to do yet further harm, had
not three cock-sparrows overtaken him just before he crossed the
bridge.
From three sides they hemmed him in, crying, "Which of us told you?"
"Which of us told you?" "Which of us told you?"--and pecked him to
pieces before he could transform himself again.
After which peace and prosperity befell all the neighbourhood.
KNAVE AND FOOL.
A Fool and a Knave once set up house together; which shows what a fool
the Fool was.
The Knave was delighted with the agreement; and the Fool thought
himself most fortunate to have met with a companion who would supply
his lack of mother-wit.
As neither of them liked work, the Knave proposed that they should
live upon their joint savings as long as these should last; and, to
avoid disputes, that they should use the Fool's share till it came to
an end, and then begin upon the Knave's stocking.
So, for a short time, they lived in great comfort at the Fool's
expense, and were very good company; for easy times make easy tempers.
Just when the store was exhausted, the Knave came running to the Fool
with an empty bag and a wry face, crying, "Dear friend, what shall we
do? This bag, which I had safely buried under a gooseberry-bush, has
been taken up by some thief, and all my money stolen. My savings were
twice as large as yours; but now that they are gone, and I can no
longer perform my share of the bargain, I fear our partnership must be
dissolved."
"Not so, dear friend," said the Fool, who was very good-natured; "we
have shared good luck together, and now we will share poverty. But as
nothing is left, I fear we must seek work."
"You speak very wisely," said the Knave, "And what, for instance, can
you do?"
"Very little," said the Fool; "but that little I do well."
"So do I," said the Knave. "Now can you plough, or sow, or feed
cattle, or plant crops?"
"Farming is not my business," said the Fool.
"Nor mine," said the Knave; "but no doubt you are a handicraftsman.
Are you clever at carpentry, mason's work, tailoring, or shoemaking?"
"I do not doubt that I should have been had I learned the trades,"
said the Fool, "but I never was bound apprentice."
"It is the same with myself," said the Knave; "but you may have finer
talents. Can you paint, or play the fiddle?"
"I never tried," said the Fool; "so I don't know."
"Just my case," said the Knave. "And now, since we can't find work, I
propose that we travel till work finds us."
The two comrades accordingly set forth, and they went on and on, till
they came to the foot of a hill, where a merchantman was standing by
his wagon, which had broken down.
"You seem two strong men," said he, as they advanced; "if you will
carry this chest of valuables up to the top of the hill, and down to
the bottom on the other side, where there is an inn, I will give you
two gold pieces for your trouble."
The Knave and the Fool consented to this, saying, "Work has found us
at last;" and they lifted the box on to their shoulders.
"Turn, and turn about," said the Knave; "but the best turn between
friends is a good turn; so I will lead the way up-hill, which is the
hardest kind of travelling, and you shall go first down-hill, the easy
half of our journey."
The Fool thought this proposal a very generous one, and, not knowing
that the lower end of their burden was the heavy one, he carried it
all the way. When they got to the inn, the merchant gave each of them
a gold piece, and, as the accommodation was good, they remained where
they were till their money was spent. After this, they lived there
awhile on credit; and when that was exhausted, they rose one morning
whilst the landlord was still in bed, and pursued their journey,
leaving old scores behind them.
They had been a long time without work or food, when they came upon a
man who sat by the roadside breaking stones, with a quart of porridge
and a spoon in a tin pot beside him.
"You look hungry, friends," said he, "and I, for my part, want to get
away. If you will break up this heap, you shall have the porridge for
supper. But when you have eaten it, put the pot and spoon under the
hedge, that I may find them when I return."
"If we eat first, we shall have strength for our work," said the
Knave; "and as there is only one spoon, we must eat by turns. But
fairly divide, friendly abide. As you went first the latter part of
our journey, I will begin on this occasion. When I stop, you fall to,
and eat as many spoonfuls as I ate. Then I will follow you in like
fashion, and so on till the pot is empty."
"Nothing could be fairer," said the Fool; and the Knave began to eat,
and went on till he had eaten a third of the porridge. The Fool, who
had counted every spoonful, now took his turn, and ate precisely as
much as his comrade. The Knave then began again, and was exact to a
mouthful; but it emptied the pot. Thus the Knave had twice as much as
the Fool, who could not see where he had been cheated.
They then set to work.
"As there is only one hammer," said the Knave, "we must work, as we
supped, by turns; and as I began last time, you shall begin this.
After you have worked awhile, I will take the hammer from you, and do
as much myself whilst you rest. Then you shall take it up again, and
so on till the heap is finished."
"It is not every one who is as just as you," said the Fool; and taking
up the hammer, he set to work with a will.
The Knave took care to let him go on till he had broken a third of the
stones, and then he did as good a share himself; after which the Fool
began again, and finished the heap.
By this means the Fool did twice as much work as the Knave, and yet he
could not complain.
As they moved on again, the Fool perceived that the Knave was taking
the can and the spoon with him.
"I am sorry to see you do that, friend," said he.
"It's a very small theft," said the Knave. "The can cannot have cost
more than sixpence when new."
"That was not what I meant," said the Fool, "so much as that I fear
the owner will find it out."
"He will only think the things have been stolen by some vagrant,"
said the Knave--"which, indeed, they would be if we left them. But as
you seem to have a tender conscience, I will keep them myself."
After a while they met with a farmer, who offered to give them supper
and a night's lodging, if they would scare the birds from a field of
corn for him till sunset.
"I will go into the outlying fields," said the Knave, "and as I see
the birds coming, I will turn them back. You, dear friend, remain in
the corn, and scare away the few that may escape me."
But whilst the Fool clapped and shouted till he was tired, the Knave
went to the other side of the hedge, and lay down for a nap.
As they sat together at supper, the Fool said, "Dear friend, this is
laborious work. I propose that we ask the farmer to let us tend sheep,
instead. That is a very different affair. One lies on the hillside all
day. The birds do not steal sheep; and all this shouting and clapping
is saved."
The Knave very willingly agreed, and next morning the two friends
drove a flock of sheep on to the downs. The sheep at once began to
nibble, the dog sat with his tongue out, panting, and the Knave and
Fool lay down on their backs, and covered their faces with their hats
to shield them from the sun.
Thus they lay till evening, when, the sun being down, they uncovered
their faces, and found that the sheep had all strayed away, and the
dog after them.
"The only plan for us is to go separate ways in search of the flock,"
said the Knave; "only let us agree to meet here again." They
accordingly started in opposite directions; but when the Fool was
fairly off, the Knave returned to his place, and lay down as before.
By and by the dog brought the sheep back; so that, when the Fool
returned, the Knave got the credit of having found them; for the dog
scorned to explain his part in the matter.
As they sat together at supper, the Fool said, "The work is not so
easy as I thought. Could we not find a better trade yet?"
"Can you beg?" said the Knave. "A beggar's trade is both easy and
profitable. Nothing is required but walking and talking. Then one
walks at his own pace, for there is no hurry, and no master, and the
same tale does for every door. And, that all may be fair and equal,
you shall beg at the front door, whilst I ask an alms at the back."
To this the Fool gladly agreed; and as he was as lean as a hunted cat,
charitable people gave him a penny or two from time to time.
Meanwhile, the Knave went round to the back yard, where he picked up
a fowl, or turkey, or anything that he could lay his hands upon.
When he returned to the Fool, he would say, "See what has been given
to me, whilst you have only got a few pence."
At last this made the Fool discontented, and he said, "I should like
now to exchange with you. I will go to the back doors, and you to the
front."
The Knave consented, and at the next house the Fool went to the back
door; but the mistress of the farm only rated him, and sent him away.
Meanwhile, the Knave, from the front, had watched her leave the
parlour, and slipping in through the window, he took a ham and a
couple of new loaves from the table, and so made off.
When the friends met, the Fool was crestfallen at his ill luck, and
the Knave complained that all the burden of their support fell upon
him. "See," said he, "what they give me, where you get only a mouthful
of abuse!" And he dined heartily on what he had stolen; but the Fool
only had bits of the breadcrust, and the parings of the ham.
At the next place the Fool went to the front door as before, and the
Knave secured a fat goose and some plums in the back yard, which he
popped under his cloak. The Fool came away with empty hands, and the
Knave scolded him, saying, "Do you suppose that I mean to share this
fat goose with a lazy beggar like you? Go on, and find for yourself."
With which he sat down and began to eat the plums, whilst the Fool
walked on alone.
After a while, however, the Knave saw a stir in the direction of the
farm they had left, and he quickly perceived that the loss of the
goose was known, and that the farmer and his men were in pursuit of
the thief. So, hastily picking up the goose, he overtook the Fool, and
pressed it into his arms, saying, "Dear friend, pardon a passing ill
humour, of which I sincerely repent. Are we not partners in good luck
and ill? I was wrong, dear friend; and, in token of my penitence, the
goose shall be yours alone. And here are a few plums with which you
may refresh yourself by the wayside. As for me, I will hasten on to
the next farm, and see if I can beg a bottle of wine to wash down the
dinner, and drink to our good-fellowship." And before the Fool could
thank him, the Knave was off like the wind.
By and by the farmer and his men came up, and found the Fool eating
the plums, with the goose on the grass beside him.
They hurried him off to the justice, where his own story met with no
credit. The woman of the next farm came up also, and recognized him
for the man who had begged at her door the day she lost a ham and two
new loaves. In vain he said that these things also had been given to
his friend. The friend never appeared; and the poor Fool was whipped
and put in the stocks.
Towards evening the Knave hurried up to the village green, where his
friend sat doing penance for the theft.
"My dear friend," said he, "what do I see? Is such cruelty possible?
But I hear that the justice is not above a bribe, and we must at any
cost obtain your release. I am going at once to pawn my own boots and
cloak, and everything about me that I can spare, and if you have
anything to add, this is no time to hesitate."
The poor Fool begged his friend to draw off his boots, and to take his
hat and coat as well, and to make all speed on his charitable errand.
The Knave, took all that he could get, and, leaving his friend sitting
in the stocks in his shirt-sleeves, he disappeared as swiftly as one
could wish a man to carry a reprieve.
For those good folks to whom everything must be explained in full, it
may be added that the Knave did not come back, and that he kept the
clothes.
It was very hard on the Fool; but what can one expect if he keeps
company with a Knave?
UNDER THE SUN.
There once lived a farmer who was so avaricious and miserly, and so
hard and close in all his dealings that, as folks say, he would skin a
flint. A Jew and a Yorkshireman had each tried to bargain with him,
and both had had the worst of it. It is needless to say that he never
either gave or lent.
Now, by thus scraping, and saving, and grinding for many years, he had
become almost wealthy; though, indeed, he was no better fed and
dressed than if he had not a penny to bless himself with. But what
vexed him sorely was that his next neighbour's farm prospered in all
matters better than his own; and this, although the owner was as
open-handed as our farmer was stingy.
When in spring he ploughed his own worn-out land, and reached the top
of the furrow where his field joined one of the richly-fed fields of
his neighbour, he would cast an envious glance over the hedge, and
say, "So far and no farther?" for he would have liked to have had the
whole under his plough. And so in the autumn, when he gathered his own
scanty crop and had to stop his sickle short of the close ranks of his
neighbour's corn, he would cry, "All this, and none of that?" and go
home sorely discontented.
Now on the lands of the liberal farmer (whose name was Merryweather)
there lived a dwarf or hillman, who made a wager that he would both
beg and borrow of the covetous farmer, and out-bargain him to boot. So
he went one day to his house, and asked him if he would kindly give
him half a stone of flour to make hasty pudding with; adding, that if
he would lend him a bag to carry it in to the hill, this should be
returned clean and in good condition.
The farmer saw with half an eye that this was the dwarf from his
neighbour's estate, and as he had always laid the luck of the liberal
farmer to his being favoured by the good people, he resolved to treat
the little man with all civility.
"Look you, wife," said he, "this is no time to be saving half a stone
of flour when we may make our fortunes at one stroke. I have heard my
grandfather tell of a man who lent a sack of oats to one of the
fairies, and got it back filled with gold pieces. And as good measure
as he gave of oats so he got of gold;" saying which, the farmer took a
canvas bag to the flour-bin, and began to fill it. Meanwhile the dwarf
sat in the larder window and cried--"We've a big party for supper
to-night; give us good measure, neighbour, and you shall have anything
under the sun that you like to ask for."
When the farmer heard this he was nearly out of his wits with delight,
and his hands shook so that the flour spilled all about the larder
floor.
"Thank you, dear sir," he said; "it's a bargain, and I agree to it. My
wife hears us, and is witness. Wife! wife!" he cried, running into the
kitchen, "I am to have anything under the sun that I choose to ask
for. I think of asking for neighbour Merryweather's estate, but this
is a chance never likely to happen again, and I should like to make a
wise choice, and that is not easy at a moment's notice."
"You will have a week to think it over in," said the dwarf, who had
come in behind him; "I must be off now, so give me my flour, and come
to the hill behind your house seven days hence at midnight, and you
shall have your share of the bargain."
So the farmer tied up the flour-sack, and helped the dwarf with it on
to his back, and as he did so he began thinking how easily the bargain
had been made, and casting about in his mind whether, he could not get
more where he had so easily got much.
"And half a stone of flour is half a stone of flour," he muttered to
himself, "and whatever it may do with thriftless people, it goes a
long way in our house. And there's the bag--and a terrible lot spilled
on the larder floor--and the string to tie it with, which doubtless
he'll never think of returning--and my time, which must be counted,
and nothing whatever for it all for a week to come." And the outlay so
weighed upon his mind that he cleared his throat and began:
"Not for seven days, did you say, sir? You know, dear sir, or perhaps,
indeed, you do not know, that when amongst each other we men have to
wait for the settlement of an account, we expect something over and
above the exact amount. Interest we call it, my dear sir."
"And you want me to give you something extra for waiting a week?"
asked the dwarf. "Pray, what do you expect?"
"Oh, dear sir, I leave it to you," said the farmer. "Perhaps you may
add some trifle--in the flour-bag, or not, as you think fit--but I
leave it entirely to you."
"I will give you something over and above what you shall choose," said
the dwarf; "but, as you say, I shall decide what it is to be." With
which he shouldered the flour-sack, and went his way.
For the next seven days, the farmer had no peace for thinking, and
planning, and scheming how to get the most out of his one wish. His
wife made many suggestions to which he did not agree, but he was
careful not to quarrel with her; "for," he said, "we will not be like
the foolish couple who wasted three wishes on black-puddings. Neither
will I desire useless grandeur and unreasonable elevation, like the
fisherman's wife. I will have a solid and substantial benefit."
And so, after a week of sleepless nights and anxious days, he came
back to his first thought, and resolved to ask for his neighbour's
estate.
At last the night came. It was full moon, and the farmer looked
anxiously about, fearing the dwarf might not be true to his
appointment. But at midnight he appeared, with the flour-bag neatly
folded in his hand.
"You hold to the agreement," said the farmer, "of course. My wife was
witness. I am to have anything under the sun that I ask for; and I am
to have it now."
"Ask away," said the dwarf.
"I want neighbour Merryweather's estate," said the farmer.
"What, all this land below here, that joins on to your own?"
"Every acre," said the farmer.
"Farmer Merryweather's fields are under the moon at present," said the
dwarf, coolly, "and thus not within the terms of the agreement. You
must choose again."
But as the farmer could choose nothing that was not then under the
moon, he soon saw that he had been outwitted, and his rage knew no
bounds at the trick the dwarf had played him.
"Give me my bag, at any rate," he screamed, "and the string--and your
own extra gift that you promised. For half a loaf is better than no
bread," he muttered, "and I may yet come in for a few gold pieces."
"There's your bag," cried the dwarf, clapping it over the miser's head
like an extinguisher; "it's clean enough for a nightcap. And there's
your string," he added, tying it tightly round the farmer's throat
till he was almost throttled. "And, for my part, I'll give you what
you deserve;" saying which he gave the farmer such a hearty kick that
he kicked him straight down from the top of the hill to his own back
"If that does not satisfy you, I'll give you as much again," shouted
the dwarf; and as the farmer made no reply, he went chuckling back to
his hill.
THE EMPEROR’S NEW CLOTHES
Many years ago, there was an Emperor, who was so excessively fond of
new clothes, that he spent all his money in dress. He did not trouble
himself in the least about his soldiers; nor did he care to go either to
the theatre or the chase, except for the opportunities then afforded him
for displaying his new clothes. He had a different suit for each hour of
the day; and as of any other king or emperor, one is accustomed to say,
“he is sitting in council,” it was always said of him, “The Emperor is
sitting in his wardrobe.”
Time passed merrily in the large town which was his capital; strangers
arrived every day at the court. One day, two rogues, calling themselves
weavers, made their appearance. They gave out that they knew how to
weave stuffs of the most beautiful colors and elaborate patterns, the
clothes manufactured from which should have the wonderful property of
remaining invisible to everyone who was unfit for the office he held, or
who was extraordinarily simple in character.
“These must, indeed, be splendid clothes!” thought the Emperor. “Had I
such a suit, I might at once find out what men in my realms are unfit
for their office, and also be able to distinguish the wise from the
foolish! This stuff must be woven for me immediately.” And he caused
large sums of money to be given to both the weavers in order that they
might begin their work directly.
So the two pretended weavers set up two looms, and affected to work very
busily, though in reality they did nothing at all. They asked for the
most delicate silk and the purest gold thread; put both into their own
knapsacks; and then continued their pretended work at the empty looms
until late at night.
“I should like to know how the weavers are getting on with my cloth,”
 said the Emperor to himself, after some little time had elapsed; he was,
however, rather embarrassed, when he remembered that a simpleton, or
one unfit for his office, would be unable to see the manufacture. To be
sure, he thought he had nothing to risk in his own person; but yet, he
would prefer sending somebody else, to bring him intelligence about the
weavers, and their work, before he troubled himself in the affair. All
the people throughout the city had heard of the wonderful property the
cloth was to possess; and all were anxious to learn how wise, or how
ignorant, their neighbors might prove to be.
“I will send my faithful old minister to the weavers,” said the Emperor
at last, after some deliberation, “he will be best able to see how the
cloth looks; for he is a man of sense, and no one can be more suitable
for his office than he is.”
So the faithful old minister went into the hall, where the knaves were
working with all their might, at their empty looms. “What can be the
meaning of this?” thought the old man, opening his eyes very wide. “I
cannot discover the least bit of thread on the looms.” However, he did
not express his thoughts aloud.
The impostors requested him very courteously to be so good as to come
nearer their looms; and then asked him whether the design pleased
him, and whether the colors were not very beautiful; at the same time
pointing to the empty frames. The poor old minister looked and looked,
he could not discover anything on the looms, for a very good reason,
viz: there was nothing there. “What!” thought he again. “Is it possible
that I am a simpleton? I have never thought so myself; and no one must
know it now if I am so. Can it be, that I am unfit for my office? No,
that must not be said either. I will never confess that I could not see
the stuff.”
“Well, Sir Minister!” said one of the knaves, still pretending to work.
“You do not say whether the stuff pleases you.”
“Oh, it is excellent!” replied the old minister, looking at the loom
through his spectacles. “This pattern, and the colors, yes, I will tell
the Emperor without delay, how very beautiful I think them.”
“We shall be much obliged to you,” said the impostors, and then they
named the different colors and described the pattern of the pretended
stuff. The old minister listened attentively to their words, in order
that he might repeat them to the Emperor; and then the knaves asked for
more silk and gold, saying that it was necessary to complete what
they had begun. However, they put all that was given them into their
knapsacks; and continued to work with as much apparent diligence as
before at their empty looms.
The Emperor now sent another officer of his court to see how the men
were getting on, and to ascertain whether the cloth would soon be
ready. It was just the same with this gentleman as with the minister;
he surveyed the looms on all sides, but could see nothing at all but the
empty frames.
“Does not the stuff appear as beautiful to you, as it did to my lord the
minister?” asked the impostors of the Emperor’s second ambassador; at
the same time making the same gestures as before, and talking of the
design and colors which were not there.
“I certainly am not stupid!” thought the messenger. “It must be, that I
am not fit for my good, profitable office! That is very odd; however, no
one shall know anything about it.” And accordingly he praised the stuff
he could not see, and declared that he was delighted with both colors
and patterns. “Indeed, please your Imperial Majesty,” said he to his
sovereign when he returned, “the cloth which the weavers are preparing
is extraordinarily magnificent.”
The whole city was talking of the splendid cloth which the Emperor had
ordered to be woven at his own expense.
And now the Emperor himself wished to see the costly manufacture, while
it was still in the loom. Accompanied by a select number of officers of
the court, among whom were the two honest men who had already admired
the cloth, he went to the crafty impostors, who, as soon as they were
aware of the Emperor’s approach, went on working more diligently than
ever; although they still did not pass a single thread through the
looms.
“Is not the work absolutely magnificent?” said the two officers of the
crown, already mentioned. “If your Majesty will only be pleased to look
at it! What a splendid design! What glorious colors!” and at the same
time they pointed to the empty frames; for they imagined that everyone
else could see this exquisite piece of workmanship.
“How is this?” said the Emperor to himself. “I can see nothing! This
is indeed a terrible affair! Am I a simpleton, or am I unfit to be an
Emperor? That would be the worst thing that could happen--Oh! the cloth
is charming,” said he, aloud. “It has my complete approbation.” And he
smiled most graciously, and looked closely at the empty looms; for on no
account would he say that he could not see what two of the officers of
his court had praised so much. All his retinue now strained their eyes,
hoping to discover something on the looms, but they could see no more
than the others; nevertheless, they all exclaimed, “Oh, how beautiful!”
 and advised his majesty to have some new clothes made from this splendid
material, for the approaching procession. “Magnificent! Charming!
Excellent!” resounded on all sides; and everyone was uncommonly gay. The
Emperor shared in the general satisfaction; and presented the impostors
with the riband of an order of knighthood, to be worn in their
button-holes, and the title of “Gentlemen Weavers.”
The rogues sat up the whole of the night before the day on which the
procession was to take place, and had sixteen lights burning, so that
everyone might see how anxious they were to finish the Emperor’s new
suit. They pretended to roll the cloth off the looms; cut the air with
their scissors; and sewed with needles without any thread in them.
“See!” cried they, at last. “The Emperor’s new clothes are ready!”
And now the Emperor, with all the grandees of his court, came to the
weavers; and the rogues raised their arms, as if in the act of holding
something up, saying, “Here are your Majesty’s trousers! Here is the
scarf! Here is the mantle! The whole suit is as light as a cobweb;
one might fancy one has nothing at all on, when dressed in it; that,
however, is the great virtue of this delicate cloth.”
“Yes indeed!” said all the courtiers, although not one of them could see
anything of this exquisite manufacture.
“If your Imperial Majesty will be graciously pleased to take off your
clothes, we will fit on the new suit, in front of the looking glass.”
The Emperor was accordingly undressed, and the rogues pretended to
array him in his new suit; the Emperor turning round, from side to side,
before the looking glass.
“How splendid his Majesty looks in his new clothes, and how well they
fit!” everyone cried out. “What a design! What colors! These are indeed
royal robes!”
“The canopy which is to be borne over your Majesty, in the procession,
is waiting,” announced the chief master of the ceremonies.
“I am quite ready,” answered the Emperor. “Do my new clothes fit well?”
 asked he, turning himself round again before the looking glass, in order
that he might appear to be examining his handsome suit.
The lords of the bedchamber, who were to carry his Majesty’s train felt
about on the ground, as if they were lifting up the ends of the mantle;
and pretended to be carrying something; for they would by no means
betray anything like simplicity, or unfitness for their office.
So now the Emperor walked under his high canopy in the midst of the
procession, through the streets of his capital; and all the people
standing by, and those at the windows, cried out, “Oh! How beautiful
are our Emperor’s new clothes! What a magnificent train there is to
the mantle; and how gracefully the scarf hangs!” in short, no one would
allow that he could not see these much-admired clothes; because, in
doing so, he would have declared himself either a simpleton or unfit
for his office. Certainly, none of the Emperor’s various suits, had ever
made so great an impression, as these invisible ones.
“But the Emperor has nothing at all on!” said a little child.
“Listen to the voice of innocence!” exclaimed his father; and what the
child had said was whispered from one to another.
“But he has nothing at all on!” at last cried out all the people.
The Emperor was vexed, for he knew that the people were right; but he
thought the procession must go on now! And the lords of the bedchamber
took greater pains than ever, to appear holding up a train, although, in
reality, there was no train to hold.
THE SWINEHERD
There was once a poor Prince, who had a kingdom. His kingdom was very
small, but still quite large enough to marry upon; and he wished to
marry.
It was certainly rather cool of him to say to the Emperor’s daughter,
“Will you have me?” But so he did; for his name was renowned far and
wide; and there were a hundred princesses who would have answered,
“Yes!” and “Thank you kindly.” We shall see what this princess said.
Listen!
It happened that where the Prince’s father lay buried, there grew a rose
tree--a most beautiful rose tree, which blossomed only once in every
five years, and even then bore only one flower, but that was a rose!
It smelt so sweet that all cares and sorrows were forgotten by him who
inhaled its fragrance.
And furthermore, the Prince had a nightingale, who could sing in such a
manner that it seemed as though all sweet melodies dwelt in her little
throat. So the Princess was to have the rose, and the nightingale; and
they were accordingly put into large silver caskets, and sent to her.
The Emperor had them brought into a large hall, where the Princess was
playing at “Visiting,” with the ladies of the court; and when she saw
the caskets with the presents, she clapped her hands for joy.
“Ah, if it were but a little pussy-cat!” said she; but the rose tree,
with its beautiful rose came to view.
“Oh, how prettily it is made!” said all the court ladies.
“It is more than pretty,” said the Emperor, “it is charming!”
But the Princess touched it, and was almost ready to cry.
“Fie, papa!” said she. “It is not made at all, it is natural!”
“Let us see what is in the other casket, before we get into a bad
humor,” said the Emperor. So the nightingale came forth and sang so
delightfully that at first no one could say anything ill-humored of her.
“Superbe! Charmant!” exclaimed the ladies; for they all used to chatter
French, each one worse than her neighbor.
“How much the bird reminds me of the musical box that belonged to our
blessed Empress,” said an old knight. “Oh yes! These are the same tones,
the same execution.”
“Yes! yes!” said the Emperor, and he wept like a child at the
remembrance.
“I will still hope that it is not a real bird,” said the Princess.
“Yes, it is a real bird,” said those who had brought it. “Well then let
the bird fly,” said the Princess; and she positively refused to see the
However, he was not to be discouraged; he daubed his face over brown and
black; pulled his cap over his ears, and knocked at the door.
“Good day to my lord, the Emperor!” said he. “Can I have employment at
the palace?”
“Why, yes,” said the Emperor. “I want some one to take care of the pigs,
for we have a great many of them.”
So the Prince was appointed “Imperial Swineherd.” He had a dirty little
room close by the pigsty; and there he sat the whole day, and worked. By
the evening he had made a pretty little kitchen-pot. Little bells were
hung all round it; and when the pot was boiling, these bells tinkled in
the most charming manner, and played the old melody,
    “Ach! du lieber Augustin,
    Alles ist weg, weg, weg!”*
    * “Ah! dear Augustine!
    All is gone, gone, gone!”
But what was still more curious, whoever held his finger in the smoke of
the kitchen-pot, immediately smelt all the dishes that were cooking on
every hearth in the city--this, you see, was something quite different
from the rose.
Now the Princess happened to walk that way; and when she heard the tune,
she stood quite still, and seemed pleased; for she could play “Lieber
Augustine”; it was the only piece she knew; and she played it with one
finger.
“Why there is my piece,” said the Princess. “That swineherd must
certainly have been well educated! Go in and ask him the price of the
instrument.”
So one of the court-ladies must run in; however, she drew on wooden
slippers first.
“What will you take for the kitchen-pot?” said the lady.
“I will have ten kisses from the Princess,” said the swineherd.
“Yes, indeed!” said the lady.
“I cannot sell it for less,” rejoined the swineherd.
“He is an impudent fellow!” said the Princess, and she walked on; but
when she had gone a little way, the bells tinkled so prettily
    Alles ist weg, weg, weg!”
“Stay,” said the Princess. “Ask him if he will have ten kisses from the
ladies of my court.”
“No, thank you!” said the swineherd. “Ten kisses from the Princess, or I
keep the kitchen-pot myself.”
“That must not be, either!” said the Princess. “But do you all stand
before me that no one may see us.”
And the court-ladies placed themselves in front of her, and spread
out their dresses--the swineherd got ten kisses, and the Princess--the
kitchen-pot.
That was delightful! The pot was boiling the whole evening, and the
whole of the following day. They knew perfectly well what was cooking at
every fire throughout the city, from the chamberlain’s to the cobbler’s;
the court-ladies danced and clapped their hands.
“We know who has soup, and who has pancakes for dinner to-day, who has
cutlets, and who has eggs. How interesting!”
“Yes, but keep my secret, for I am an Emperor’s daughter.”
The swineherd--that is to say--the Prince, for no one knew that he was
other than an ill-favored swineherd, let not a day pass without working
at something; he at last constructed a rattle, which, when it was swung
round, played all the waltzes and jig tunes, which have ever been heard
since the creation of the world.
“Ah, that is superbe!” said the Princess when she passed by. “I have
never heard prettier compositions! Go in and ask him the price of the
instrument; but mind, he shall have no more kisses!”
“He will have a hundred kisses from the Princess!” said the lady who had
been to ask.
“I think he is not in his right senses!” said the Princess, and walked
on, but when she had gone a little way, she stopped again. “One must
encourage art,” said she, “I am the Emperor’s daughter. Tell him he
shall, as on yesterday, have ten kisses from me, and may take the rest
from the ladies of the court.”
“Oh--but we should not like that at all!” said they. “What are you
muttering?” asked the Princess. “If I can kiss him, surely you can.
Remember that you owe everything to me.” So the ladies were obliged to
go to him again.
“A hundred kisses from the Princess,” said he, “or else let everyone
keep his own!”
“Stand round!” said she; and all the ladies stood round her whilst the
kissing was going on.
“What can be the reason for such a crowd close by the pigsty?” said the
Emperor, who happened just then to step out on the balcony; he rubbed
his eyes, and put on his spectacles. “They are the ladies of the
court; I must go down and see what they are about!” So he pulled up his
slippers at the heel, for he had trodden them down.
As soon as he had got into the court-yard, he moved very softly, and the
ladies were so much engrossed with counting the kisses, that all might
go on fairly, that they did not perceive the Emperor. He rose on his
tiptoes.
“What is all this?” said he, when he saw what was going on, and he boxed
the Princess’s ears with his slipper, just as the swineherd was taking
the eighty-sixth kiss.
“March out!” said the Emperor, for he was very angry; and both Princess
and swineherd were thrust out of the city.
The Princess now stood and wept, the swineherd scolded, and the rain
poured down.
“Alas! Unhappy creature that I am!” said the Princess. “If I had but
married the handsome young Prince! Ah! how unfortunate I am!”
And the swineherd went behind a tree, washed the black and brown color
from his face, threw off his dirty clothes, and stepped forth in his
princely robes; he looked so noble that the Princess could not help
bowing before him.
“I am come to despise thee,” said he. “Thou would’st not have an
honorable Prince! Thou could’st not prize the rose and the nightingale,
but thou wast ready to kiss the swineherd for the sake of a trumpery
plaything. Thou art rightly served.”
He then went back to his own little kingdom, and shut the door of his
palace in her face. Now she might well sing,
THE REAL PRINCESS
There was once a Prince who wished to marry a Princess; but then she
must be a real Princess. He travelled all over the world in hopes of
finding such a lady; but there was always something wrong. Princesses he
found in plenty; but whether they were real Princesses it was impossible
for him to decide, for now one thing, now another, seemed to him not
quite right about the ladies. At last he returned to his palace quite
cast down, because he wished so much to have a real Princess for his
wife.
One evening a fearful tempest arose, it thundered and lightened, and the
rain poured down from the sky in torrents: besides, it was as dark as
pitch. All at once there was heard a violent knocking at the door, and
the old King, the Prince’s father, went out himself to open it.
It was a Princess who was standing outside the door. What with the rain
and the wind, she was in a sad condition; the water trickled down from
her hair, and her clothes clung to her body. She said she was a real
Princess.
“Ah! we shall soon see that!” thought the old Queen-mother; however, she
said not a word of what she was going to do; but went quietly into the
bedroom, took all the bed-clothes off the bed, and put three little peas
on the bedstead. She then laid twenty mattresses one upon another over
the three peas, and put twenty feather beds over the mattresses.
Upon this bed the Princess was to pass the night.
The next morning she was asked how she had slept. “Oh, very badly
indeed!” she replied. “I have scarcely closed my eyes the whole night
through. I do not know what was in my bed, but I had something hard
under me, and am all over black and blue. It has hurt me so much!”
Now it was plain that the lady must be a real Princess, since she had
been able to feel the three little peas through the twenty mattresses
and twenty feather beds. None but a real Princess could have had such a
delicate sense of feeling.
The Prince accordingly made her his wife; being now convinced that he
had found a real Princess. The three peas were however put into the
cabinet of curiosities, where they are still to be seen, provided they
are not lost.
Wasn’t this a lady of real delicacy?
THE SHOES OF FORTUNE
I. A Beginning
Every author has some peculiarity in his descriptions or in his style
of writing. Those who do not like him, magnify it, shrug up their
shoulders, and exclaim--there he is again! I, for my part, know very
well how I can bring about this movement and this exclamation. It would
happen immediately if I were to begin here, as I intended to do, with:
“Rome has its Corso, Naples its Toledo”--“Ah! that Andersen; there he is
again!” they would cry; yet I must, to please my fancy, continue quite
quietly, and add: “But Copenhagen has its East Street.”
Here, then, we will stay for the present. In one of the houses not far
from the new market a party was invited--a very large party, in order,
as is often the case, to get a return invitation from the others. One
half of the company was already seated at the card-table, the other half
awaited the result of the stereotype preliminary observation of the lady
of the house:
“Now let us see what we can do to amuse ourselves.”
They had got just so far, and the conversation began to crystallise,
as it could but do with the scanty stream which the commonplace world
supplied. Amongst other things they spoke of the middle ages: some
praised that period as far more interesting, far more poetical than our
own too sober present; indeed Councillor Knap defended this opinion
so warmly, that the hostess declared immediately on his side, and both
exerted themselves with unwearied eloquence. The Councillor boldly
declared the time of King Hans to be the noblest and the most happy
period.*
* A.D. 1482-1513
While the conversation turned on this subject, and was only for a moment
interrupted by the arrival of a journal that contained nothing worth
reading, we will just step out into the antechamber, where cloaks,
mackintoshes, sticks, umbrellas, and shoes, were deposited. Here sat two
female figures, a young and an old one. One might have thought at first
they were servants come to accompany their mistresses home; but on
looking nearer, one soon saw they could scarcely be mere servants; their
forms were too noble for that, their skin too fine, the cut of their
dress too striking. Two fairies were they; the younger, it is true,
was not Dame Fortune herself, but one of the waiting-maids of her
handmaidens who carry about the lesser good things that she distributes;
the other looked extremely gloomy--it was Care. She always attends to
her own serious business herself, as then she is sure of having it done
properly.
They were telling each other, with a confidential interchange of ideas,
where they had been during the day. The messenger of Fortune had only
executed a few unimportant commissions, such as saving a new bonnet from
a shower of rain, etc.; but what she had yet to perform was something
quite unusual.
“I must tell you,” said she, “that to-day is my birthday; and in honor
of it, a pair of walking-shoes or galoshes has been entrusted to me,
which I am to carry to mankind. These shoes possess the property of
instantly transporting him who has them on to the place or the period
in which he most wishes to be; every wish, as regards time or place, or
state of being, will be immediately fulfilled, and so at last man will
be happy, here below.”
“Do you seriously believe it?” replied Care, in a severe tone of
reproach. “No; he will be very unhappy, and will assuredly bless the
moment when he feels that he has freed himself from the fatal shoes.”
“Stupid nonsense!” said the other angrily. “I will put them here by
the door. Some one will make a mistake for certain and take the wrong
ones--he will be a happy man.”
Such was their conversation.
II. What Happened to the Councillor
It was late; Councillor Knap, deeply occupied with the times of King
Hans, intended to go home, and malicious Fate managed matters so that
his feet, instead of finding their way to his own galoshes, slipped
into those of Fortune. Thus caparisoned the good man walked out of the
well-lighted rooms into East Street. By the magic power of the shoes he
was carried back to the times of King Hans; on which account his foot
very naturally sank in the mud and puddles of the street, there having
been in those days no pavement in Copenhagen.
“Well! This is too bad! How dirty it is here!” sighed the Councillor.
“As to a pavement, I can find no traces of one, and all the lamps, it
seems, have gone to sleep.”
The moon was not yet very high; it was besides rather foggy, so that
in the darkness all objects seemed mingled in chaotic confusion. At the
next corner hung a votive lamp before a Madonna, but the light it gave
was little better than none at all; indeed, he did not observe it before
he was exactly under it, and his eyes fell upon the bright colors of the
pictures which represented the well-known group of the Virgin and the
infant Jesus.
“That is probably a wax-work show,” thought he; “and the people delay
taking down their sign in hopes of a late visitor or two.”
A few persons in the costume of the time of King Hans passed quickly by
“How strange they look! The good folks come probably from a masquerade!”
Suddenly was heard the sound of drums and fifes; the bright blaze of a
fire shot up from time to time, and its ruddy gleams seemed to contend
with the bluish light of the torches. The Councillor stood still, and
watched a most strange procession pass by. First came a dozen drummers,
who understood pretty well how to handle their instruments; then came
halberdiers, and some armed with cross-bows. The principal person in the
procession was a priest. Astonished at what he saw, the Councillor asked
what was the meaning of all this mummery, and who that man was.
“That’s the Bishop of Zealand,” was the answer.
“Good Heavens! What has taken possession of the Bishop?” sighed the
Councillor, shaking his head. It certainly could not be the Bishop; even
though he was considered the most absent man in the whole kingdom, and
people told the drollest anecdotes about him. Reflecting on the matter,
and without looking right or left, the Councillor went through East
Street and across the Habro-Platz. The bridge leading to Palace Square
was not to be found; scarcely trusting his senses, the nocturnal
wanderer discovered a shallow piece of water, and here fell in with two
men who very comfortably were rocking to and fro in a boat.
“Does your honor want to cross the ferry to the Holme?” asked they.
“Across to the Holme!” said the Councillor, who knew nothing of the age
in which he at that moment was. “No, I am going to Christianshafen, to
Little Market Street.”
Both men stared at him in astonishment.
“Only just tell me where the bridge is,” said he. “It is really
unpardonable that there are no lamps here; and it is as dirty as if one
had to wade through a morass.”
The longer he spoke with the boatmen, the more unintelligible did their
language become to him.
“I don’t understand your Bornholmish dialect,” said he at last, angrily,
and turning his back upon them. He was unable to find the bridge: there
was no railway either. “It is really disgraceful what a state this place
is in,” muttered he to himself. Never had his age, with which, however,
he was always grumbling, seemed so miserable as on this evening. “I’ll
take a hackney-coach!” thought he. But where were the hackney-coaches?
Not one was to be seen.
“I must go back to the New Market; there, it is to be hoped, I
shall find some coaches; for if I don’t, I shall never get safe to
Christianshafen.”
So off he went in the direction of East Street, and had nearly got to
the end of it when the moon shone forth.
“God bless me! What wooden scaffolding is that which they have set up
there?” cried he involuntarily, as he looked at East Gate, which, in
those days, was at the end of East Street.
He found, however, a little side-door open, and through this he went,
and stepped into our New Market of the present time. It was a huge
desolate plain; some wild bushes stood up here and there, while across
the field flowed a broad canal or river. Some wretched hovels for the
Dutch sailors, resembling great boxes, and after which the place was
named, lay about in confused disorder on the opposite bank.
“I either behold a fata morgana, or I am regularly tipsy,” whimpered out
the Councillor. “But what’s this?”
He turned round anew, firmly convinced that he was seriously ill. He
gazed at the street formerly so well known to him, and now so strange in
appearance, and looked at the houses more attentively: most of them were
of wood, slightly put together; and many had a thatched roof.
“No--I am far from well,” sighed he; “and yet I drank only one glass of
punch; but I cannot suppose it--it was, too, really very wrong to give
us punch and hot salmon for supper. I shall speak about it at the first
opportunity. I have half a mind to go back again, and say what I suffer.
But no, that would be too silly; and Heaven only knows if they are up
still.”
He looked for the house, but it had vanished.
“It is really dreadful,” groaned he with increasing anxiety; “I cannot
recognise East Street again; there is not a single decent shop from one
end to the other! Nothing but wretched huts can I see anywhere; just
as if I were at Ringstead. Oh! I am ill! I can scarcely bear myself any
longer. Where the deuce can the house be? It must be here on this very
spot; yet there is not the slightest idea of resemblance, to such a
degree has everything changed this night! At all events here are some
people up and stirring. Oh! oh! I am certainly very ill.”
He now hit upon a half-open door, through a chink of which a faint light
shone. It was a sort of hostelry of those times; a kind of public-house.
The room had some resemblance to the clay-floored halls in Holstein; a
pretty numerous company, consisting of seamen, Copenhagen burghers, and
a few scholars, sat here in deep converse over their pewter cans, and
gave little heed to the person who entered.
“By your leave!” said the Councillor to the Hostess, who came bustling
towards him. “I’ve felt so queer all of a sudden; would you have the
goodness to send for a hackney-coach to take me to Christianshafen?”
The woman examined him with eyes of astonishment, and shook her head;
she then addressed him in German. The Councillor thought she did not
understand Danish, and therefore repeated his wish in German. This, in
connection with his costume, strengthened the good woman in the belief
that he was a foreigner. That he was ill, she comprehended directly; so
she brought him a pitcher of water, which tasted certainly pretty strong
of the sea, although it had been fetched from the well.
The Councillor supported his head on his hand, drew a long breath, and
thought over all the wondrous things he saw around him.
“Is this the Daily News of this evening?” he asked mechanically, as he
saw the Hostess push aside a large sheet of paper.
The meaning of this councillorship query remained, of course, a riddle
to her, yet she handed him the paper without replying. It was a coarse
wood-cut, representing a splendid meteor “as seen in the town of
Cologne,” which was to be read below in bright letters.
“That is very old!” said the Councillor, whom this piece of antiquity
began to make considerably more cheerful. “Pray how did you come into
possession of this rare print? It is extremely interesting, although the
whole is a mere fable. Such meteorous appearances are to be explained in
this way--that they are the reflections of the Aurora Borealis, and it
is highly probable they are caused principally by electricity.”
Those persons who were sitting nearest him and heard his speech,
stared at him in wonderment; and one of them rose, took off his hat
respectfully, and said with a serious countenance, “You are no doubt a
very learned man, Monsieur.”
“Oh no,” answered the Councillor, “I can only join in conversation on
this topic and on that, as indeed one must do according to the demands
of the world at present.”
“Modestia is a fine virtue,” continued the gentleman; “however, as to
your speech, I must say mihi secus videtur: yet I am willing to suspend
my judicium.”
“May I ask with whom I have the pleasure of speaking?” asked the
Councillor.
“I am a Bachelor in Theologia,” answered the gentleman with a stiff
reverence.
This reply fully satisfied the Councillor; the title suited the dress.
“He is certainly,” thought he, “some village schoolmaster--some queer
old fellow, such as one still often meets with in Jutland.”
“This is no locus docendi, it is true,” began the clerical gentleman;
“yet I beg you earnestly to let us profit by your learning. Your reading
in the ancients is, sine dubio, of vast extent?”
“Oh yes, I’ve read something, to be sure,” replied the Councillor. “I
like reading all useful works; but I do not on that account despise the
modern ones; ‘tis only the unfortunate ‘Tales of Every-day Life’ that I
cannot bear--we have enough and more than enough such in reality.”
“‘Tales of Every-day Life?’” said our Bachelor inquiringly.
“I mean those new fangled novels, twisting and writhing themselves in
the dust of commonplace, which also expect to find a reading public.”
“Oh,” exclaimed the clerical gentleman smiling, “there is much wit in
them; besides they are read at court. The King likes the history of Sir
Iffven and Sir Gaudian particularly, which treats of King Arthur, and
his Knights of the Round Table; he has more than once joked about it
with his high vassals.”
“I have not read that novel,” said the Councillor; “it must be quite a
new one, that Heiberg has published lately.”
“No,” answered the theologian of the time of King Hans: “that book is
not written by a Heiberg, but was imprinted by Godfrey von Gehmen.”
“Oh, is that the author’s name?” said the Councillor. “It is a very
old name, and, as well as I recollect, he was the first printer that
appeared in Denmark.”
“Yes, he is our first printer,” replied the clerical gentleman hastily.
So far all went on well. Some one of the worthy burghers now spoke of
the dreadful pestilence that had raged in the country a few years back,
meaning that of 1484. The Councillor imagined it was the cholera that
was meant, which people made so much fuss about; and the discourse
passed off satisfactorily enough. The war of the buccaneers of 1490 was
so recent that it could not fail being alluded to; the English
pirates had, they said, most shamefully taken their ships while in the
roadstead; and the Councillor, before whose eyes the Herostratic [*]
event of 1801 still floated vividly, agreed entirely with the others in
abusing the rascally English. With other topics he was not so fortunate;
every moment brought about some new confusion, and threatened to become
a perfect Babel; for the worthy Bachelor was really too ignorant, and
the simplest observations of the Councillor sounded to him too daring
and phantastical. They looked at one another from the crown of the head
to the soles of the feet; and when matters grew to too high a
pitch, then the Bachelor talked Latin, in the hope of being better
understood--but it was of no use after all.
     * Herostratus, or Eratostratus--an Ephesian, who wantonly
     set fire to the famous temple of Diana, in order to
     commemorate his name by so uncommon an action.
“What’s the matter?” asked the Hostess, plucking the Councillor by the
sleeve; and now his recollection returned, for in the course of the
conversation he had entirely forgotten all that had preceded it.
“Merciful God, where am I!” exclaimed he in agony; and while he so
thought, all his ideas and feelings of overpowering dizziness, against
which he struggled with the utmost power of desperation, encompassed
him with renewed force. “Let us drink claret and mead, and Bremen beer,”
 shouted one of the guests--“and you shall drink with us!”
Two maidens approached. One wore a cap of two staring colors, denoting
the class of persons to which she belonged. They poured out the liquor,
and made the most friendly gesticulations; while a cold perspiration
trickled down the back of the poor Councillor.
“What’s to be the end of this! What’s to become of me!” groaned he; but
he was forced, in spite of his opposition, to drink with the rest. They
took hold of the worthy man; who, hearing on every side that he was
intoxicated, did not in the least doubt the truth of this certainly
not very polite assertion; but on the contrary, implored the ladies
and gentlemen present to procure him a hackney-coach: they, however,
imagined he was talking Russian.
Never before, he thought, had he been in such a coarse and ignorant
company; one might almost fancy the people had turned heathens again.
“It is the most dreadful moment of my life: the whole world is leagued
against me!” But suddenly it occurred to him that he might stoop down
under the table, and then creep unobserved out of the door. He did so;
but just as he was going, the others remarked what he was about; they
laid hold of him by the legs; and now, happily for him, off fell his
fatal shoes--and with them the charm was at an end.
The Councillor saw quite distinctly before him a lantern burning, and
behind this a large handsome house. All seemed to him in proper order as
usual; it was East Street, splendid and elegant as we now see it. He lay
with his feet towards a doorway, and exactly opposite sat the watchman
“Gracious Heaven!” said he. “Have I lain here in the street and dreamed?
Yes; ‘tis East Street! How splendid and light it is! But really it is
terrible what an effect that one glass of punch must have had on me!”
Two minutes later, he was sitting in a hackney-coach and driving to
Frederickshafen. He thought of the distress and agony he had endured,
and praised from the very bottom of his heart the happy reality--our own
time--which, with all its deficiencies, is yet much better than that in
which, so much against his inclination, he had lately been.
III. The Watchman’s Adventure
“Why, there is a pair of galoshes, as sure as I’m alive!” said the
watchman, awaking from a gentle slumber. “They belong no doubt to the
lieutenant who lives over the way. They lie close to the door.”
The worthy man was inclined to ring and deliver them at the house, for
there was still a light in the window; but he did not like disturbing
the other people in their beds, and so very considerately he left the
matter alone.
“Such a pair of shoes must be very warm and comfortable,” said he; “the
leather is so soft and supple.” They fitted his feet as though they
had been made for him. “‘Tis a curious world we live in,” continued he,
soliloquizing. “There is the lieutenant, now, who might go quietly to
bed if he chose, where no doubt he could stretch himself at his ease;
but does he do it? No; he saunters up and down his room, because,
probably, he has enjoyed too many of the good things of this world at
his dinner. That’s a happy fellow! He has neither an infirm mother, nor
a whole troop of everlastingly hungry children to torment him. Every
evening he goes to a party, where his nice supper costs him nothing:
would to Heaven I could but change with him! How happy should I be!”
While expressing his wish, the charm of the shoes, which he had put on,
began to work; the watchman entered into the being and nature of the
lieutenant. He stood in the handsomely furnished apartment, and held
between his fingers a small sheet of rose-colored paper, on which some
verses were written--written indeed by the officer himself; for who has
not, at least once in his life, had a lyrical moment? And if one then
marks down one’s thoughts, poetry is produced. But here was written:
                  OH, WERE I RICH!
     “Oh, were I rich! Such was my wish, yea such
      When hardly three feet high, I longed for much.
       Oh, were I rich! an officer were I,
       With sword, and uniform, and plume so high.
       And the time came, and officer was I!
     But yet I grew not rich. Alas, poor me!
     Have pity, Thou, who all man’s wants dost see.
        “I sat one evening sunk in dreams of bliss,
      A maid of seven years old gave me a kiss,
       I at that time was rich in poesy
       And tales of old, though poor as poor could be;
       But all she asked for was this poesy.
     Then was I rich, but not in gold, poor me!
     As Thou dost know, who all men’s hearts canst see.
        “Oh, were I rich! Oft asked I for this boon.
      The child grew up to womanhood full soon.
       She is so pretty, clever, and so kind
     Oh, did she know what’s hidden in my mind--
       A tale of old. Would she to me were kind!
     But I’m condemned to silence! oh, poor me!
        “Oh, were I rich in calm and peace of mind,
      My grief you then would not here written find!
       O thou, to whom I do my heart devote,
       Oh read this page of glad days now remote,
       A dark, dark tale, which I tonight devote!
     Dark is the future now. Alas, poor me!
     Have pity Thou, who all men’s pains dost see.”
Such verses as these people write when they are in love! But no man
in his senses ever thinks of printing them. Here one of the sorrows of
life, in which there is real poetry, gave itself vent; not that
barren grief which the poet may only hint at, but never depict in its
detail--misery and want: that animal necessity, in short, to snatch
at least at a fallen leaf of the bread-fruit tree, if not at the fruit
itself. The higher the position in which one finds oneself transplanted,
the greater is the suffering. Everyday necessity is the stagnant pool of
life--no lovely picture reflects itself therein. Lieutenant, love, and
lack of money--that is a symbolic triangle, or much the same as the
half of the shattered die of Fortune. This the lieutenant felt most
poignantly, and this was the reason he leant his head against the
window, and sighed so deeply.
“The poor watchman out there in the street is far happier than I. He
knows not what I term privation. He has a home, a wife, and children,
who weep with him over his sorrows, who rejoice with him when he is
glad. Oh, far happier were I, could I exchange with him my being--with
his desires and with his hopes perform the weary pilgrimage of life! Oh,
he is a hundred times happier than I!”
In the same moment the watchman was again watchman. It was the shoes
that caused the metamorphosis by means of which, unknown to himself, he
took upon him the thoughts and feelings of the officer; but, as we have
just seen, he felt himself in his new situation much less contented,
and now preferred the very thing which but some minutes before he had
rejected. So then the watchman was again watchman.
“That was an unpleasant dream,” said he; “but ‘twas droll enough
altogether. I fancied that I was the lieutenant over there: and yet
the thing was not very much to my taste after all. I missed my good old
mother and the dear little ones; who almost tear me to pieces for sheer
love.”
He seated himself once more and nodded: the dream continued to haunt
him, for he still had the shoes on his feet. A falling star shone in the
dark firmament.
“There falls another star,” said he: “but what does it matter; there
are always enough left. I should not much mind examining the little
glimmering things somewhat nearer, especially the moon; for that would
not slip so easily through a man’s fingers. When we die--so at least
says the student, for whom my wife does the washing--we shall fly about
as light as a feather from one such a star to the other. That’s, of
course, not true: but ‘twould be pretty enough if it were so. If I could
but once take a leap up there, my body might stay here on the steps for
what I care.”
Behold--there are certain things in the world to which one ought never
to give utterance except with the greatest caution; but doubly careful
must one be when we have the Shoes of Fortune on our feet. Now just
listen to what happened to the watchman.
As to ourselves, we all know the speed produced by the employment of
steam; we have experienced it either on railroads, or in boats when
crossing the sea; but such a flight is like the travelling of a sloth in
comparison with the velocity with which light moves. It flies nineteen
million times faster than the best race-horse; and yet electricity is
quicker still. Death is an electric shock which our heart receives; the
freed soul soars upwards on the wings of electricity. The sun’s light
wants eight minutes and some seconds to perform a journey of more than
twenty million of our Danish miles; borne by electricity, the soul
wants even some minutes less to accomplish the same flight. To it the
space between the heavenly bodies is not greater than the distance
between the homes of our friends in town is for us, even if they live a
short way from each other; such an electric shock in the heart, however,
costs us the use of the body here below; unless, like the watchman of
East Street, we happen to have on the Shoes of Fortune.
     * A Danish mile is nearly 4 3/4 English.
In a few seconds the watchman had done the fifty-two thousand of our
miles up to the moon, which, as everyone knows, was formed out of
matter much lighter than our earth; and is, so we should say, as soft
as newly-fallen snow. He found himself on one of the many circumjacent
mountain-ridges with which we are acquainted by means of Dr. Madler’s
“Map of the Moon.” Within, down it sunk perpendicularly into a caldron,
about a Danish mile in depth; while below lay a town, whose appearance
we can, in some measure, realize to ourselves by beating the white of
an egg in a glass of water. The matter of which it was built was just as
soft, and formed similar towers, and domes, and pillars, transparent and
rocking in the thin air; while above his head our earth was rolling like
a large fiery ball.
He perceived immediately a quantity of beings who were certainly what
we call “men”; yet they looked different to us. A far more correct
imagination than that of the pseudo-Herschel* had created them; and
if they had been placed in rank and file, and copied by some skilful
painter’s hand, one would, without doubt, have exclaimed involuntarily,
“What a beautiful arabesque!”
*This relates to a book published some years ago in Germany, and said
to be by Herschel, which contained a description of the moon and its
inhabitants, written with such a semblance of truth that many were
deceived by the imposture.
Probably a translation of the celebrated Moon hoax, written by Richard
A. Locke, and originally published in New York.
They had a language too; but surely nobody can expect that the soul of
the watchman should understand it. Be that as it may, it did comprehend
it; for in our souls there germinate far greater powers than we poor
mortals, despite all our cleverness, have any notion of. Does she
not show us--she the queen in the land of enchantment--her astounding
dramatic talent in all our dreams? There every acquaintance appears and
speaks upon the stage, so entirely in character, and with the same tone
of voice, that none of us, when awake, were able to imitate it. How
well can she recall persons to our mind, of whom we have not thought for
years; when suddenly they step forth “every inch a man,” resembling the
real personages, even to the finest features, and become the heroes
or heroines of our world of dreams. In reality, such remembrances are
rather unpleasant: every sin, every evil thought, may, like a clock with
alarm or chimes, be repeated at pleasure; then the question is if we can
trust ourselves to give an account of every unbecoming word in our heart
and on our lips.
The watchman’s spirit understood the language of the inhabitants of the
moon pretty well. The Selenites* disputed variously about our earth,
and expressed their doubts if it could be inhabited: the air, they said,
must certainly be too dense to allow any rational dweller in the moon
the necessary free respiration. They considered the moon alone to
be inhabited: they imagined it was the real heart of the universe or
planetary system, on which the genuine Cosmopolites, or citizens of the
world, dwelt. What strange things men--no, what strange things Selenites
sometimes take into their heads!
* Dwellers in the moon.
About politics they had a good deal to say. But little Denmark must
take care what it is about, and not run counter to the moon; that
great realm, that might in an ill-humor bestir itself, and dash down a
hail-storm in our faces, or force the Baltic to overflow the sides of
its gigantic basin.
We will, therefore, not listen to what was spoken, and on no condition
run in the possibility of telling tales out of school; but we will
rather proceed, like good quiet citizens, to East Street, and observe
what happened meanwhile to the body of the watchman.
He sat lifeless on the steps: the morning-star,* that is to say, the
heavy wooden staff, headed with iron spikes, and which had nothing else
in common with its sparkling brother in the sky, had glided from his
hand; while his eyes were fixed with glassy stare on the moon, looking
for the good old fellow of a spirit which still haunted it.
*The watchmen in Germany, had formerly, and in some places they still
carry with them, on their rounds at night, a sort of mace or club, known
in ancient times by the above denomination.
“What’s the hour, watchman?” asked a passer-by. But when the watchman
gave no reply, the merry roysterer, who was now returning home from a
noisy drinking bout, took it into his head to try what a tweak of the
nose would do, on which the supposed sleeper lost his balance, the body
lay motionless, stretched out on the pavement: the man was dead. When
the patrol came up, all his comrades, who comprehended nothing of the
whole affair, were seized with a dreadful fright, for dead he was,
and he remained so. The proper authorities were informed of the
circumstance, people talked a good deal about it, and in the morning the
body was carried to the hospital.
Now that would be a very pretty joke, if the spirit when it came back
and looked for the body in East Street, were not to find one. No doubt
it would, in its anxiety, run off to the police, and then to the
“Hue and Cry” office, to announce that “the finder will be handsomely
rewarded,” and at last away to the hospital; yet we may boldly assert
that the soul is shrewdest when it shakes off every fetter, and every
sort of leading-string--the body only makes it stupid.
The seemingly dead body of the watchman wandered, as we have said, to
the hospital, where it was brought into the general viewing-room:
and the first thing that was done here was naturally to pull off the
galoshes--when the spirit, that was merely gone out on adventures, must
have returned with the quickness of lightning to its earthly tenement.
It took its direction towards the body in a straight line; and a few
seconds after, life began to show itself in the man. He asserted that
the preceding night had been the worst that ever the malice of fate had
allotted him; he would not for two silver marks again go through what he
had endured while moon-stricken; but now, however, it was over.
The same day he was discharged from the hospital as perfectly cured; but
the Shoes meanwhile remained behind.
IV. A Moment of Head Importance--An Evening’s “Dramatic Readings”--A
Most Strange Journey
Every inhabitant of Copenhagen knows, from personal inspection, how
the entrance to Frederick’s Hospital looks; but as it is possible that
others, who are not Copenhagen people, may also read this little work,
we will beforehand give a short description of it.
The extensive building is separated from the street by a pretty high
railing, the thick iron bars of which are so far apart, that in
all seriousness, it is said, some very thin fellow had of a night
occasionally squeezed himself through to go and pay his little visits
in the town. The part of the body most difficult to manage on such
occasions was, no doubt, the head; here, as is so often the case in
the world, long-headed people get through best. So much, then, for the
introduction.
One of the young men, whose head, in a physical sense only, might be
said to be of the thickest, had the watch that evening. The rain poured
down in torrents; yet despite these two obstacles, the young man was
obliged to go out, if it were but for a quarter of an hour; and as
to telling the door-keeper about it, that, he thought, was quite
unnecessary, if, with a whole skin, he were able to slip through the
railings. There, on the floor lay the galoshes, which the watchman
had forgotten; he never dreamed for a moment that they were those of
Fortune; and they promised to do him good service in the wet; so he put
them on. The question now was, if he could squeeze himself through the
grating, for he had never tried before. Well, there he stood.
“Would to Heaven I had got my head through!” said he, involuntarily; and
instantly through it slipped, easily and without pain, notwithstanding
it was pretty large and thick. But now the rest of the body was to be
got through!
“Ah! I am much too stout,” groaned he aloud, while fixed as in a vice.
“I had thought the head was the most difficult part of the matter--oh!
oh! I really cannot squeeze myself through!”
He now wanted to pull his over-hasty head back again, but he could not.
For his neck there was room enough, but for nothing more. His first
feeling was of anger; his next that his temper fell to zero. The
Shoes of Fortune had placed him in the most dreadful situation; and,
unfortunately, it never occurred to him to wish himself free. The
pitch-black clouds poured down their contents in still heavier torrents;
not a creature was to be seen in the streets. To reach up to the bell
was what he did not like; to cry aloud for help would have availed him
little; besides, how ashamed would he have been to be found caught in a
trap, like an outwitted fox! How was he to twist himself through! He saw
clearly that it was his irrevocable destiny to remain a prisoner till
dawn, or, perhaps, even late in the morning; then the smith must be
fetched to file away the bars; but all that would not be done so quickly
as he could think about it. The whole Charity School, just opposite,
would be in motion; all the new booths, with their not very
courtier-like swarm of seamen, would join them out of curiosity, and
would greet him with a wild “hurrah!” while he was standing in his
pillory: there would be a mob, a hissing, and rejoicing, and jeering,
ten times worse than in the rows about the Jews some years ago--“Oh, my
blood is mounting to my brain; ‘tis enough to drive one mad! I shall go
wild! I know not what to do. Oh! were I but loose; my dizziness would
then cease; oh, were my head but loose!”
You see he ought to have said that sooner; for the moment he expressed
the wish his head was free; and cured of all his paroxysms of love, he
hastened off to his room, where the pains consequent on the fright the
Shoes had prepared for him, did not so soon take their leave.
But you must not think that the affair is over now; it grows much worse.
The night passed, the next day also; but nobody came to fetch the Shoes.
In the evening “Dramatic Readings” were to be given at the little
theatre in King Street. The house was filled to suffocation; and among
other pieces to be recited was a new poem by H. C. Andersen, called, My
Aunt’s Spectacles; the contents of which were pretty nearly as follows:
“A certain person had an aunt, who boasted of particular skill in
fortune-telling with cards, and who was constantly being stormed by
persons that wanted to have a peep into futurity. But she was full of
mystery about her art, in which a certain pair of magic spectacles
did her essential service. Her nephew, a merry boy, who was his aunt’s
darling, begged so long for these spectacles, that, at last, she lent
him the treasure, after having informed him, with many exhortations,
that in order to execute the interesting trick, he need only repair to
some place where a great many persons were assembled; and then, from a
higher position, whence he could overlook the crowd, pass the company in
review before him through his spectacles. Immediately ‘the inner man’ of
each individual would be displayed before him, like a game of cards, in
which he unerringly might read what the future of every person presented
was to be. Well pleased the little magician hastened away to prove the
powers of the spectacles in the theatre; no place seeming to him more
fitted for such a trial. He begged permission of the worthy audience,
and set his spectacles on his nose. A motley phantasmagoria presents
itself before him, which he describes in a few satirical touches, yet
without expressing his opinion openly: he tells the people enough to set
them all thinking and guessing; but in order to hurt nobody, he wraps
his witty oracular judgments in a transparent veil, or rather in a lurid
thundercloud, shooting forth bright sparks of wit, that they may fall in
the powder-magazine of the expectant audience.”
The humorous poem was admirably recited, and the speaker much applauded.
Among the audience was the young man of the hospital, who seemed to have
forgotten his adventure of the preceding night. He had on the Shoes; for
as yet no lawful owner had appeared to claim them; and besides it was so
very dirty out-of-doors, they were just the thing for him, he thought.
The beginning of the poem he praised with great generosity: he even
found the idea original and effective. But that the end of it, like the
Rhine, was very insignificant, proved, in his opinion, the author’s
want of invention; he was without genius, etc. This was an excellent
opportunity to have said something clever.
Meanwhile he was haunted by the idea--he should like to possess such a
pair of spectacles himself; then, perhaps, by using them circumspectly,
one would be able to look into people’s hearts, which, he thought, would
be far more interesting than merely to see what was to happen next year;
for that we should all know in proper time, but the other never.
“I can now,” said he to himself, “fancy the whole row of ladies and
gentlemen sitting there in the front row; if one could but see into
their hearts--yes, that would be a revelation--a sort of bazar. In that
lady yonder, so strangely dressed, I should find for certain a large
milliner’s shop; in that one the shop is empty, but it wants cleaning
plain enough. But there would also be some good stately shops among
them. Alas!” sighed he, “I know one in which all is stately; but there
sits already a spruce young shopman, which is the only thing that’s
amiss in the whole shop. All would be splendidly decked out, and we
should hear, ‘Walk in, gentlemen, pray walk in; here you will find all
you please to want.’ Ah! I wish to Heaven I could walk in and take a
trip right through the hearts of those present!”
And behold! to the Shoes of Fortune this was the cue; the whole man
shrunk together and a most uncommon journey through the hearts of the
front row of spectators, now began. The first heart through which he
came, was that of a middle-aged lady, but he instantly fancied himself
in the room of the “Institution for the cure of the crooked and
deformed,” where casts of mis-shapen limbs are displayed in naked
reality on the wall. Yet there was this difference, in the institution
the casts were taken at the entry of the patient; but here they were
retained and guarded in the heart while the sound persons went away.
They were, namely, casts of female friends, whose bodily or mental
deformities were here most faithfully preserved.
With the snake-like writhings of an idea he glided into another female
heart; but this seemed to him like a large holy fane. The white dove of
innocence fluttered over the altar. How gladly would he have sunk upon
his knees; but he must away to the next heart; yet he still heard the
pealing tones of the organ, and he himself seemed to have become a newer
and a better man; he felt unworthy to tread the neighboring sanctuary
which a poor garret, with a sick bed-rid mother, revealed. But God’s
warm sun streamed through the open window; lovely roses nodded from
the wooden flower-boxes on the roof, and two sky-blue birds sang
rejoicingly, while the sick mother implored God’s richest blessings on
her pious daughter.
     * temple
He now crept on hands and feet through a butcher’s shop; at least on
every side, and above and below, there was nought but flesh. It was the
heart of a most respectable rich man, whose name is certain to be found
in the Directory.
He was now in the heart of the wife of this worthy gentleman. It was an
old, dilapidated, mouldering dovecot. The husband’s portrait was used as
a weather-cock, which was connected in some way or other with the doors,
and so they opened and shut of their own accord, whenever the stern old
husband turned round.
Hereupon he wandered into a boudoir formed entirely of mirrors, like
the one in Castle Rosenburg; but here the glasses magnified to an
astonishing degree. On the floor, in the middle of the room, sat, like a
Dalai-Lama, the insignificant “Self” of the person, quite confounded at
his own greatness. He then imagined he had got into a needle-case full
of pointed needles of every size.
“This is certainly the heart of an old maid,” thought he. But he was
mistaken. It was the heart of a young military man; a man, as people
said, of talent and feeling.
In the greatest perplexity, he now came out of the last heart in the
row; he was unable to put his thoughts in order, and fancied that his
too lively imagination had run away with him.
“Good Heavens!” sighed he. “I have surely a disposition to madness--‘tis
dreadfully hot here; my blood boils in my veins and my head is burning
like a coal.” And he now remembered the important event of the evening
before, how his head had got jammed in between the iron railings of the
hospital. “That’s what it is, no doubt,” said he. “I must do something
in time: under such circumstances a Russian bath might do me good. I
only wish I were already on the upper bank.” [*]
     *In these Russian (vapor) baths the person extends himself
     on a bank or form, and as he gets accustomed to the heat,
     moves to another higher up towards the ceiling, where, of
     course, the vapor is warmest. In this manner he ascends
     gradually to the highest.
And so there he lay on the uppermost bank in the vapor-bath; but with
all his clothes on, in his boots and galoshes, while the hot drops fell
scalding from the ceiling on his face.
“Holloa!” cried he, leaping down. The bathing attendant, on his side,
uttered a loud cry of astonishment when he beheld in the bath, a man
completely dressed.
The other, however, retained sufficient presence of mind to whisper to
him, “‘Tis a bet, and I have won it!” But the first thing he did as soon
as he got home, was to have a large blister put on his chest and back to
draw out his madness.
The next morning he had a sore chest and a bleeding back; and, excepting
the fright, that was all that he had gained by the Shoes of Fortune.
V. Metamorphosis of the Copying-Clerk
The watchman, whom we have certainly not forgotten, thought meanwhile
of the galoshes he had found and taken with him to the hospital; he now
went to fetch them; and as neither the lieutenant, nor anybody else in
the street, claimed them as his property, they were delivered over to
the police-office.*
*As on the continent, in all law and police practices nothing is verbal,
but any circumstance, however trifling, is reduced to writing, the
labor, as well as the number of papers that thus accumulate, is
enormous. In a police-office, consequently, we find copying-clerks among
many other scribes of various denominations, of which, it seems, our
hero was one.
“Why, I declare the Shoes look just like my own,” said one of the
clerks, eying the newly-found treasure, whose hidden powers, even he,
sharp as he was, was not able to discover. “One must have more than
the eye of a shoemaker to know one pair from the other,” said he,
soliloquizing; and putting, at the same time, the galoshes in search of
an owner, beside his own in the corner.
“Here, sir!” said one of the men, who panting brought him a tremendous
pile of papers.
The copying-clerk turned round and spoke awhile with the man about the
reports and legal documents in question; but when he had finished, and
his eye fell again on the Shoes, he was unable to say whether those to
the left or those to the right belonged to him. “At all events it must
be those which are wet,” thought he; but this time, in spite of his
cleverness, he guessed quite wrong, for it was just those of Fortune
which played as it were into his hands, or rather on his feet. And why,
I should like to know, are the police never to be wrong? So he put them
on quickly, stuck his papers in his pocket, and took besides a few under
his arm, intending to look them through at home to make the necessary
notes. It was noon; and the weather, that had threatened rain, began
to clear up, while gaily dressed holiday folks filled the streets. “A
little trip to Fredericksburg would do me no great harm,” thought he;
“for I, poor beast of burden that I am, have so much to annoy me, that I
don’t know what a good appetite is. ‘Tis a bitter crust, alas! at which
I am condemned to gnaw!”
Nobody could be more steady or quiet than this young man; we therefore
wish him joy of the excursion with all our heart; and it will certainly
be beneficial for a person who leads so sedentary a life. In the park
he met a friend, one of our young poets, who told him that the following
day he should set out on his long-intended tour.
“So you are going away again!” said the clerk. “You are a very free
and happy being; we others are chained by the leg and held fast to our
desk.”
“Yes; but it is a chain, friend, which ensures you the blessed bread
of existence,” answered the poet. “You need feel no care for the coming
morrow: when you are old, you receive a pension.”
“True,” said the clerk, shrugging his shoulders; “and yet you are
the better off. To sit at one’s ease and poetise--that is a pleasure;
everybody has something agreeable to say to you, and you are always your
own master. No, friend, you should but try what it is to sit from one
year’s end to the other occupied with and judging the most trivial
matters.”
The poet shook his head, the copying-clerk did the same. Each one kept
to his own opinion, and so they separated.
“It’s a strange race, those poets!” said the clerk, who was very fond of
soliloquizing. “I should like some day, just for a trial, to take such
nature upon me, and be a poet myself; I am very sure I should make
no such miserable verses as the others. Today, methinks, is a most
delicious day for a poet. Nature seems anew to celebrate her awakening
into life. The air is so unusually clear, the clouds sail on so
buoyantly, and from the green herbage a fragrance is exhaled that fills
me with delight. For many a year have I not felt as at this moment.”
We see already, by the foregoing effusion, that he is become a poet; to
give further proof of it, however, would in most cases be insipid, for
it is a most foolish notion to fancy a poet different from other men.
Among the latter there may be far more poetical natures than many an
acknowledged poet, when examined more closely, could boast of; the
difference only is, that the poet possesses a better mental memory, on
which account he is able to retain the feeling and the thought till they
can be embodied by means of words; a faculty which the others do not
possess. But the transition from a commonplace nature to one that is
richly endowed, demands always a more or less breakneck leap over a
certain abyss which yawns threateningly below; and thus must the sudden
change with the clerk strike the reader.
“The sweet air!” continued he of the police-office, in his dreamy
imaginings; “how it reminds me of the violets in the garden of my aunt
Magdalena! Yes, then I was a little wild boy, who did not go to school
very regularly. O heavens! ‘tis a long time since I have thought on
those times. The good old soul! She lived behind the Exchange. She
always had a few twigs or green shoots in water--let the winter rage
without as it might. The violets exhaled their sweet breath, whilst I
pressed against the windowpanes covered with fantastic frost-work the
copper coin I had heated on the stove, and so made peep-holes.
What splendid vistas were then opened to my view! What change--what
magnificence! Yonder in the canal lay the ships frozen up, and deserted
by their whole crews, with a screaming crow for the sole occupant. But
when the spring, with a gentle stirring motion, announced her arrival,
a new and busy life arose; with songs and hurrahs the ice was sawn
asunder, the ships were fresh tarred and rigged, that they might sail
away to distant lands. But I have remained here--must always remain
here, sitting at my desk in the office, and patiently see other people
fetch their passports to go abroad. Such is my fate! Alas!”--sighed he,
and was again silent. “Great Heaven! What is come to me! Never have I
thought or felt like this before! It must be the summer air that affects
me with feelings almost as disquieting as they are refreshing.”
He felt in his pocket for the papers. “These police-reports will soon
stem the torrent of my ideas, and effectually hinder any rebellious
overflowing of the time-worn banks of official duties”; he said to
himself consolingly, while his eye ran over the first page. “DAME
TIGBRITH, tragedy in five acts.” “What is that? And yet it is undeniably
my own handwriting. Have I written the tragedy? Wonderful, very
wonderful!--And this--what have I here? ‘INTRIGUE ON THE RAMPARTS; or
THE DAY OF REPENTANCE: vaudeville with new songs to the most favorite
airs.’ The deuce! Where did I get all this rubbish? Some one must have
slipped it slyly into my pocket for a joke. There is too a letter to me;
a crumpled letter and the seal broken.”
Yes; it was not a very polite epistle from the manager of a theatre, in
which both pieces were flatly refused.
“Hem! hem!” said the clerk breathlessly, and quite exhausted he seated
himself on a bank. His thoughts were so elastic, his heart so tender;
and involuntarily he picked one of the nearest flowers. It is a simple
daisy, just bursting out of the bud. What the botanist tells us after
a number of imperfect lectures, the flower proclaimed in a minute. It
related the mythus of its birth, told of the power of the sun-light that
spread out its delicate leaves, and forced them to impregnate the air
with their incense--and then he thought of the manifold struggles of
life, which in like manner awaken the budding flowers of feeling in our
bosom. Light and air contend with chivalric emulation for the love of
the fair flower that bestowed her chief favors on the latter; full of
longing she turned towards the light, and as soon as it vanished, rolled
her tender leaves together and slept in the embraces of the air. “It is
the light which adorns me,” said the flower.
“But ‘tis the air which enables thee to breathe,” said the poet’s voice.
Close by stood a boy who dashed his stick into a wet ditch. The drops of
water splashed up to the green leafy roof, and the clerk thought of the
million of ephemera which in a single drop were thrown up to a height,
that was as great doubtless for their size, as for us if we were to
be hurled above the clouds. While he thought of this and of the whole
metamorphosis he had undergone, he smiled and said, “I sleep and dream;
but it is wonderful how one can dream so naturally, and know besides so
exactly that it is but a dream. If only to-morrow on awaking, I could
again call all to mind so vividly! I seem in unusually good spirits; my
perception of things is clear, I feel as light and cheerful as though
I were in heaven; but I know for a certainty, that if to-morrow a dim
remembrance of it should swim before my mind, it will then seem nothing
but stupid nonsense, as I have often experienced already--especially
before I enlisted under the banner of the police, for that dispels like
a whirlwind all the visions of an unfettered imagination. All we hear
or say in a dream that is fair and beautiful is like the gold of the
subterranean spirits; it is rich and splendid when it is given us, but
viewed by daylight we find only withered leaves. Alas!” he sighed quite
sorrowful, and gazed at the chirping birds that hopped contentedly from
branch to branch, “they are much better off than I! To fly must be a
heavenly art; and happy do I prize that creature in which it is innate.
Yes! Could I exchange my nature with any other creature, I fain would be
such a happy little lark!”
He had hardly uttered these hasty words when the skirts and sleeves
of his coat folded themselves together into wings; the clothes became
feathers, and the galoshes claws. He observed it perfectly, and laughed
in his heart. “Now then, there is no doubt that I am dreaming; but I
never before was aware of such mad freaks as these.” And up he flew into
the green roof and sang; but in the song there was no poetry, for the
spirit of the poet was gone. The Shoes, as is the case with anybody who
does what he has to do properly, could only attend to one thing at a
time. He wanted to be a poet, and he was one; he now wished to be a
merry chirping bird: but when he was metamorphosed into one, the former
peculiarities ceased immediately. “It is really pleasant enough,” said
he: “the whole day long I sit in the office amid the driest
law-papers, and at night I fly in my dream as a lark in the gardens of
Fredericksburg; one might really write a very pretty comedy upon it.” He
now fluttered down into the grass, turned his head gracefully on every
side, and with his bill pecked the pliant blades of grass, which, in
comparison to his present size, seemed as majestic as the palm-branches
of northern Africa.
Unfortunately the pleasure lasted but a moment. Presently black night
overshadowed our enthusiast, who had so entirely missed his part of
copying-clerk at a police-office; some vast object seemed to be thrown
over him. It was a large oil-skin cap, which a sailor-boy of the quay
had thrown over the struggling bird; a coarse hand sought its way
carefully in under the broad rim, and seized the clerk over the back
and wings. In the first moment of fear, he called, indeed, as loud as
he could--“You impudent little blackguard! I am a copying-clerk at
the police-office; and you know you cannot insult any belonging to the
constabulary force without a chastisement. Besides, you good-for-nothing
rascal, it is strictly forbidden to catch birds in the royal gardens of
Fredericksburg; but your blue uniform betrays where you come from.”
 This fine tirade sounded, however, to the ungodly sailor-boy like a mere
“Pippi-pi.” He gave the noisy bird a knock on his beak, and walked on.
He was soon met by two schoolboys of the upper class--that is to say as
individuals, for with regard to learning they were in the lowest class
in the school; and they bought the stupid bird. So the copying-clerk
came to Copenhagen as guest, or rather as prisoner in a family living in
Gother Street.
“‘Tis well that I’m dreaming,” said the clerk, “or I really should get
angry. First I was a poet; now sold for a few pence as a lark; no doubt
it was that accursed poetical nature which has metamorphosed me
into such a poor harmless little creature. It is really pitiable,
particularly when one gets into the hands of a little blackguard,
perfect in all sorts of cruelty to animals: all I should like to know
is, how the story will end.”
The two schoolboys, the proprietors now of the transformed clerk,
carried him into an elegant room. A stout stately dame received them
with a smile; but she expressed much dissatisfaction that a common
field-bird, as she called the lark, should appear in such high society.
For to-day, however, she would allow it; and they must shut him in the
empty cage that was standing in the window. “Perhaps he will amuse my
good Polly,” added the lady, looking with a benignant smile at a large
green parrot that swung himself backwards and forwards most comfortably
in his ring, inside a magnificent brass-wired cage. “To-day is Polly’s
birthday,” said she with stupid simplicity: “and the little brown
field-bird must wish him joy.”
Mr. Polly uttered not a syllable in reply, but swung to and fro with
dignified condescension; while a pretty canary, as yellow as gold, that
had lately been brought from his sunny fragrant home, began to sing
aloud.
“Noisy creature! Will you be quiet!” screamed the lady of the house,
covering the cage with an embroidered white pocket handkerchief.
“Chirp, chirp!” sighed he. “That was a dreadful snowstorm”; and he
sighed again, and was silent.
The copying-clerk, or, as the lady said, the brown field-bird, was
put into a small cage, close to the Canary, and not far from “my good
Polly.” The only human sounds that the Parrot could bawl out
were, “Come, let us be men!” Everything else that he said was as
unintelligible to everybody as the chirping of the Canary, except to the
clerk, who was now a bird too: he understood his companion perfectly.
“I flew about beneath the green palms and the blossoming almond-trees,”
 sang the Canary; “I flew around, with my brothers and sisters, over
the beautiful flowers, and over the glassy lakes, where the bright
water-plants nodded to me from below. There, too, I saw many
splendidly-dressed paroquets, that told the drollest stories, and the
wildest fairy tales without end.”
“Oh! those were uncouth birds,” answered the Parrot. “They had no
education, and talked of whatever came into their head.
“If my mistress and all her friends can laugh at what I say, so may you
too, I should think. It is a great fault to have no taste for what is
witty or amusing--come, let us be men.”
“Ah, you have no remembrance of love for the charming maidens that
danced beneath the outspread tents beside the bright fragrant flowers?
Do you no longer remember the sweet fruits, and the cooling juice in
the wild plants of our never-to-be-forgotten home?” said the former
inhabitant of the Canary Isles, continuing his dithyrambic.
“Oh, yes,” said the Parrot; “but I am far better off here. I am well
fed, and get friendly treatment. I know I am a clever fellow; and that
is all I care about. Come, let us be men. You are of a poetical nature,
as it is called--I, on the contrary, possess profound knowledge and
inexhaustible wit. You have genius; but clear-sighted, calm discretion
does not take such lofty flights, and utter such high natural tones.
For this they have covered you over--they never do the like to me; for
I cost more. Besides, they are afraid of my beak; and I have always a
witty answer at hand. Come, let us be men!”
“O warm spicy land of my birth,” sang the Canary bird; “I will sing of
thy dark-green bowers, of the calm bays where the pendent boughs
kiss the surface of the water; I will sing of the rejoicing of all my
brothers and sisters where the cactus grows in wanton luxuriance.”
“Spare us your elegiac tones,” said the Parrot giggling. “Rather speak
of something at which one may laugh heartily. Laughing is an infallible
sign of the highest degree of mental development. Can a dog, or a horse
laugh? No, but they can cry. The gift of laughing was given to man
alone. Ha! ha! ha!” screamed Polly, and added his stereotype witticism.
“Come, let us be men!”
“Poor little Danish grey-bird,” said the Canary; “you have been caught
too. It is, no doubt, cold enough in your woods, but there at least
is the breath of liberty; therefore fly away. In the hurry they have
forgotten to shut your cage, and the upper window is open. Fly, my
friend; fly away. Farewell!”
Instinctively the Clerk obeyed; with a few strokes of his wings he was
out of the cage; but at the same moment the door, which was only ajar,
and which led to the next room, began to creak, and supple and creeping
came the large tomcat into the room, and began to pursue him. The
frightened Canary fluttered about in his cage; the Parrot flapped his
wings, and cried, “Come, let us be men!” The Clerk felt a mortal fright,
and flew through the window, far away over the houses and streets. At
last he was forced to rest a little.
The neighboring house had a something familiar about it; a window stood
open; he flew in; it was his own room. He perched upon the table.
“Come, let us be men!” said he, involuntarily imitating the chatter of
the Parrot, and at the same moment he was again a copying-clerk; but he
was sitting in the middle of the table.
“Heaven help me!” cried he. “How did I get up here--and so buried in
sleep, too? After all, that was a very unpleasant, disagreeable dream
that haunted me! The whole story is nothing but silly, stupid nonsense!”
VI. The Best That the Galoshes Gave
The following day, early in the morning, while the Clerk was still in
bed, someone knocked at his door. It was his neighbor, a young Divine,
who lived on the same floor. He walked in.
“Lend me your Galoshes,” said he; “it is so wet in the garden, though
the sun is shining most invitingly. I should like to go out a little.”
He got the Galoshes, and he was soon below in a little duodecimo garden,
where between two immense walls a plumtree and an apple-tree were
standing. Even such a little garden as this was considered in the
metropolis of Copenhagen as a great luxury.
The young man wandered up and down the narrow paths, as well as the
prescribed limits would allow; the clock struck six; without was heard
the horn of a post-boy.
“To travel! to travel!” exclaimed he, overcome by most painful and
passionate remembrances. “That is the happiest thing in the world! That
is the highest aim of all my wishes! Then at last would the agonizing
restlessness be allayed, which destroys my existence! But it must be
far, far away! I would behold magnificent Switzerland; I would travel to
Italy, and--”
It was a good thing that the power of the Galoshes worked as
instantaneously as lightning in a powder-magazine would do, otherwise
the poor man with his overstrained wishes would have travelled about
the world too much for himself as well as for us. In short, he was
travelling. He was in the middle of Switzerland, but packed up with
eight other passengers in the inside of an eternally-creaking diligence;
his head ached till it almost split, his weary neck could hardly bear
the heavy load, and his feet, pinched by his torturing boots, were
terribly swollen. He was in an intermediate state between sleeping and
waking; at variance with himself, with his company, with the country,
and with the government. In his right pocket he had his letter of
credit, in the left, his passport, and in a small leathern purse some
double louis d’or, carefully sewn up in the bosom of his waistcoat.
Every dream proclaimed that one or the other of these valuables was
lost; wherefore he started up as in a fever; and the first movement
which his hand made, described a magic triangle from the right pocket to
the left, and then up towards the bosom, to feel if he had them all safe
or not. From the roof inside the carriage, umbrellas, walking-sticks,
hats, and sundry other articles were depending, and hindered the view,
which was particularly imposing. He now endeavored as well as he
was able to dispel his gloom, which was caused by outward chance
circumstances merely, and on the bosom of nature imbibe the milk of
purest human enjoyment.
Grand, solemn, and dark was the whole landscape around. The gigantic
pine-forests, on the pointed crags, seemed almost like little tufts of
heather, colored by the surrounding clouds. It began to snow, a cold
wind blew and roared as though it were seeking a bride.
“Augh!” sighed he, “were we only on the other side the Alps, then we
should have summer, and I could get my letters of credit cashed. The
anxiety I feel about them prevents me enjoying Switzerland. Were I but
on the other side!”
And so saying he was on the other side in Italy, between Florence and
Rome. Lake Thracymene, illumined by the evening sun, lay like flaming
gold between the dark-blue mountain-ridges; here, where Hannibal
defeated Flaminius, the rivers now held each other in their green
embraces; lovely, half-naked children tended a herd of black swine,
beneath a group of fragrant laurel-trees, hard by the road-side.
Could we render this inimitable picture properly, then would everybody
exclaim, “Beautiful, unparalleled Italy!” But neither the young Divine
said so, nor anyone of his grumbling companions in the coach of the
vetturino.
The poisonous flies and gnats swarmed around by thousands; in vain one
waved myrtle-branches about like mad; the audacious insect population
did not cease to sting; nor was there a single person in the
well-crammed carriage whose face was not swollen and sore from their
ravenous bites. The poor horses, tortured almost to death, suffered most
from this truly Egyptian plague; the flies alighted upon them in large
disgusting swarms; and if the coachman got down and scraped them off,
hardly a minute elapsed before they were there again. The sun now set: a
freezing cold, though of short duration pervaded the whole creation;
it was like a horrid gust coming from a burial-vault on a warm summer’s
day--but all around the mountains retained that wonderful green tone
which we see in some old pictures, and which, should we not have seen a
similar play of color in the South, we declare at once to be unnatural.
It was a glorious prospect; but the stomach was empty, the body tired;
all that the heart cared and longed for was good night-quarters; yet
how would they be? For these one looked much more anxiously than for the
charms of nature, which every where were so profusely displayed.
The road led through an olive-grove, and here the solitary inn was
situated. Ten or twelve crippled-beggars had encamped outside. The
healthiest of them resembled, to use an expression of Marryat’s,
“Hunger’s eldest son when he had come of age”; the others were either
blind, had withered legs and crept about on their hands, or withered
arms and fingerless hands. It was the most wretched misery, dragged
from among the filthiest rags. “Excellenza, miserabili!” sighed they,
thrusting forth their deformed limbs to view. Even the hostess, with
bare feet, uncombed hair, and dressed in a garment of doubtful color,
received the guests grumblingly. The doors were fastened with a loop of
string; the floor of the rooms presented a stone paving half torn
up; bats fluttered wildly about the ceiling; and as to the smell
therein--no--that was beyond description.
“You had better lay the cloth below in the stable,” said one of the
travellers; “there, at all events, one knows what one is breathing.”
The windows were quickly opened, to let in a little fresh air. Quicker,
however, than the breeze, the withered, sallow arms of the beggars were
thrust in, accompanied by the eternal whine of “Miserabili, miserabili,
excellenza!” On the walls were displayed innumerable inscriptions,
written in nearly every language of Europe, some in verse, some in
prose, most of them not very laudatory of “bella Italia.”
The meal was served. It consisted of a soup of salted water, seasoned
with pepper and rancid oil. The last ingredient played a very prominent
part in the salad; stale eggs and roasted cocks’-combs furnished the
grand dish of the repast; the wine even was not without a disgusting
taste--it was like a medicinal draught.
At night the boxes and other effects of the passengers were placed
against the rickety doors. One of the travellers kept watch while the
others slept. The sentry was our young Divine. How close it was in the
chamber! The heat oppressive to suffocation--the gnats hummed and stung
unceasingly--the “miserabili” without whined and moaned in their sleep.
“Travelling would be agreeable enough,” said he groaning, “if one only
had no body, or could send it to rest while the spirit went on its
pilgrimage unhindered, whither the voice within might call it. Wherever
I go, I am pursued by a longing that is insatiable--that I cannot
explain to myself, and that tears my very heart. I want something better
than what is but what is fled in an instant. But what is it, and where
is it to be found? Yet, I know in reality what it is I wish for. Oh!
most happy were I, could I but reach one aim--could but reach the
happiest of all!”
And as he spoke the word he was again in his home; the long white
curtains hung down from the windows, and in the middle of the floor
stood the black coffin; in it he lay in the sleep of death. His wish
was fulfilled--the body rested, while the spirit went unhindered on its
pilgrimage. “Let no one deem himself happy before his end,” were the
words of Solon; and here was a new and brilliant proof of the wisdom of
the old apothegm.
Every corpse is a sphynx of immortality; here too on the black coffin
the sphynx gave us no answer to what he who lay within had written two
days before:
     “O mighty Death! thy silence teaches nought,
       Thou leadest only to the near grave’s brink;
      Is broken now the ladder of my thoughts?
     Do I instead of mounting only sink?
     Our heaviest grief the world oft seeth not,
      Our sorest pain we hide from stranger eyes:
      And for the sufferer there is nothing left
     But the green mound that o’er the coffin lies.”
Two figures were moving in the chamber. We knew them both; it was the
fairy of Care, and the emissary of Fortune. They both bent over the
corpse.
“Do you now see,” said Care, “what happiness your Galoshes have brought
to mankind?”
“To him, at least, who slumbers here, they have brought an imperishable
blessing,” answered the other.
“Ah no!” replied Care. “He took his departure himself; he was not called
away. His mental powers here below were not strong enough to reach the
treasures lying beyond this life, and which his destiny ordained he
should obtain. I will now confer a benefit on him.”
And she took the Galoshes from his feet; his sleep of death was ended;
and he who had been thus called back again to life arose from his
dread couch in all the vigor of youth. Care vanished, and with her the
Galoshes. She has no doubt taken them for herself, to keep them to all
eternity.
THE FIR TREE
Out in the woods stood a nice little Fir Tree. The place he had was a
very good one: the sun shone on him: as to fresh air, there was enough
of that, and round him grew many large-sized comrades, pines as well as
firs. But the little Fir wanted so very much to be a grown-up tree.
He did not think of the warm sun and of the fresh air; he did not care
for the little cottage children that ran about and prattled when they
were in the woods looking for wild-strawberries. The children often came
with a whole pitcher full of berries, or a long row of them threaded on
a straw, and sat down near the young tree and said, “Oh, how pretty he
is! What a nice little fir!” But this was what the Tree could not bear
to hear.
At the end of a year he had shot up a good deal, and after another year
he was another long bit taller; for with fir trees one can always tell
by the shoots how many years old they are.
“Oh! Were I but such a high tree as the others are,” sighed he. “Then I
should be able to spread out my branches, and with the tops to look into
the wide world! Then would the birds build nests among my branches: and
when there was a breeze, I could bend with as much stateliness as the
others!”
Neither the sunbeams, nor the birds, nor the red clouds which morning
and evening sailed above him, gave the little Tree any pleasure.
In winter, when the snow lay glittering on the ground, a hare would
often come leaping along, and jump right over the little Tree. Oh, that
made him so angry! But two winters were past, and in the third the Tree
was so large that the hare was obliged to go round it. “To grow and
grow, to get older and be tall,” thought the Tree--“that, after all, is
the most delightful thing in the world!”
In autumn the wood-cutters always came and felled some of the largest
trees. This happened every year; and the young Fir Tree, that had now
grown to a very comely size, trembled at the sight; for the magnificent
great trees fell to the earth with noise and cracking, the branches were
lopped off, and the trees looked long and bare; they were hardly to be
recognised; and then they were laid in carts, and the horses dragged
them out of the wood.
Where did they go to? What became of them?
In spring, when the swallows and the storks came, the Tree asked them,
“Don’t you know where they have been taken? Have you not met them
anywhere?”
The swallows did not know anything about it; but the Stork looked
musing, nodded his head, and said, “Yes; I think I know; I met many
ships as I was flying hither from Egypt; on the ships were magnificent
masts, and I venture to assert that it was they that smelt so of fir.
I may congratulate you, for they lifted themselves on high most
majestically!”
“Oh, were I but old enough to fly across the sea! But how does the sea
look in reality? What is it like?”
“That would take a long time to explain,” said the Stork, and with these
words off he went.
“Rejoice in thy growth!” said the Sunbeams. “Rejoice in thy vigorous
growth, and in the fresh life that moveth within thee!”
And the Wind kissed the Tree, and the Dew wept tears over him; but the
Fir understood it not.
When Christmas came, quite young trees were cut down: trees which often
were not even as large or of the same age as this Fir Tree, who could
never rest, but always wanted to be off. These young trees, and they
were always the finest looking, retained their branches; they were laid
on carts, and the horses drew them out of the wood.
“Where are they going to?” asked the Fir. “They are not taller than
I; there was one indeed that was considerably shorter; and why do they
retain all their branches? Whither are they taken?”
“We know! We know!” chirped the Sparrows. “We have peeped in at the
windows in the town below! We know whither they are taken! The greatest
splendor and the greatest magnificence one can imagine await them. We
peeped through the windows, and saw them planted in the middle of the
warm room and ornamented with the most splendid things, with gilded
apples, with gingerbread, with toys, and many hundred lights!”
“And then?” asked the Fir Tree, trembling in every bough. “And then?
What happens then?”
“We did not see anything more: it was incomparably beautiful.”
“I would fain know if I am destined for so glorious a career,” cried
the Tree, rejoicing. “That is still better than to cross the sea! What
a longing do I suffer! Were Christmas but come! I am now tall, and my
branches spread like the others that were carried off last year! Oh!
were I but already on the cart! Were I in the warm room with all the
splendor and magnificence! Yes; then something better, something still
grander, will surely follow, or wherefore should they thus ornament me?
Something better, something still grander must follow--but what? Oh, how
I long, how I suffer! I do not know myself what is the matter with me!”
“Rejoice in our presence!” said the Air and the Sunlight. “Rejoice in
thy own fresh youth!”
But the Tree did not rejoice at all; he grew and grew, and was green
both winter and summer. People that saw him said, “What a fine tree!”
 and towards Christmas he was one of the first that was cut down. The axe
struck deep into the very pith; the Tree fell to the earth with a sigh;
he felt a pang--it was like a swoon; he could not think of happiness,
for he was sorrowful at being separated from his home, from the place
where he had sprung up. He well knew that he should never see his dear
old comrades, the little bushes and flowers around him, anymore; perhaps
not even the birds! The departure was not at all agreeable.
The Tree only came to himself when he was unloaded in a court-yard with
the other trees, and heard a man say, “That one is splendid! We don’t
want the others.” Then two servants came in rich livery and carried the
Fir Tree into a large and splendid drawing-room. Portraits were hanging
on the walls, and near the white porcelain stove stood two large Chinese
vases with lions on the covers. There, too, were large easy-chairs,
silken sofas, large tables full of picture-books and full of toys, worth
hundreds and hundreds of crowns--at least the children said so. And the
Fir Tree was stuck upright in a cask that was filled with sand; but no
one could see that it was a cask, for green cloth was hung all round it,
and it stood on a large gaily-colored carpet. Oh! how the Tree quivered!
What was to happen? The servants, as well as the young ladies, decorated
it. On one branch there hung little nets cut out of colored paper, and
each net was filled with sugarplums; and among the other boughs gilded
apples and walnuts were suspended, looking as though they had grown
there, and little blue and white tapers were placed among the leaves.
Dolls that looked for all the world like men--the Tree had never beheld
such before--were seen among the foliage, and at the very top a
large star of gold tinsel was fixed. It was really splendid--beyond
description splendid.
“This evening!” they all said. “How it will shine this evening!”
“Oh!” thought the Tree. “If the evening were but come! If the tapers
were but lighted! And then I wonder what will happen! Perhaps the other
trees from the forest will come to look at me! Perhaps the sparrows will
beat against the windowpanes! I wonder if I shall take root here, and
winter and summer stand covered with ornaments!”
He knew very much about the matter--but he was so impatient that for
sheer longing he got a pain in his back, and this with trees is the same
thing as a headache with us.
The candles were now lighted--what brightness! What splendor! The
Tree trembled so in every bough that one of the tapers set fire to the
foliage. It blazed up famously.
“Help! Help!” cried the young ladies, and they quickly put out the fire.
Now the Tree did not even dare tremble. What a state he was in! He was
so uneasy lest he should lose something of his splendor, that he was
quite bewildered amidst the glare and brightness; when suddenly both
folding-doors opened and a troop of children rushed in as if they would
upset the Tree. The older persons followed quietly; the little ones
stood quite still. But it was only for a moment; then they shouted that
the whole place re-echoed with their rejoicing; they danced round the
Tree, and one present after the other was pulled off.
“What are they about?” thought the Tree. “What is to happen now!” And
the lights burned down to the very branches, and as they burned down
they were put out one after the other, and then the children had
permission to plunder the Tree. So they fell upon it with such violence
that all its branches cracked; if it had not been fixed firmly in the
ground, it would certainly have tumbled down.
The children danced about with their beautiful playthings; no one looked
at the Tree except the old nurse, who peeped between the branches; but
it was only to see if there was a fig or an apple left that had been
forgotten.
“A story! A story!” cried the children, drawing a little fat man towards
the Tree. He seated himself under it and said, “Now we are in the shade,
and the Tree can listen too. But I shall tell only one story. Now which
will you have; that about Ivedy-Avedy, or about Humpy-Dumpy, who
tumbled downstairs, and yet after all came to the throne and married the
princess?”
“Ivedy-Avedy,” cried some; “Humpy-Dumpy,” cried the others. There was
such a bawling and screaming--the Fir Tree alone was silent, and he
thought to himself, “Am I not to bawl with the rest? Am I to do nothing
whatever?” for he was one of the company, and had done what he had to
do.
And the man told about Humpy-Dumpy that tumbled down, who
notwithstanding came to the throne, and at last married the princess.
And the children clapped their hands, and cried. “Oh, go on! Do go on!”
 They wanted to hear about Ivedy-Avedy too, but the little man only told
them about Humpy-Dumpy. The Fir Tree stood quite still and absorbed
in thought; the birds in the wood had never related the like of this.
“Humpy-Dumpy fell downstairs, and yet he married the princess! Yes, yes!
That’s the way of the world!” thought the Fir Tree, and believed it all,
because the man who told the story was so good-looking. “Well, well! who
knows, perhaps I may fall downstairs, too, and get a princess as wife!”
 And he looked forward with joy to the morrow, when he hoped to be decked
out again with lights, playthings, fruits, and tinsel.
“I won’t tremble to-morrow!” thought the Fir Tree. “I will enjoy to
the full all my splendor! To-morrow I shall hear again the story of
Humpy-Dumpy, and perhaps that of Ivedy-Avedy too.” And the whole night
the Tree stood still and in deep thought.
In the morning the servant and the housemaid came in.
“Now then the splendor will begin again,” thought the Fir. But they
dragged him out of the room, and up the stairs into the loft: and here,
in a dark corner, where no daylight could enter, they left him. “What’s
the meaning of this?” thought the Tree. “What am I to do here? What
shall I hear now, I wonder?” And he leaned against the wall lost in
reverie. Time enough had he too for his reflections; for days and nights
passed on, and nobody came up; and when at last somebody did come, it
was only to put some great trunks in a corner, out of the way. There
stood the Tree quite hidden; it seemed as if he had been entirely
“‘Tis now winter out-of-doors!” thought the Tree. “The earth is hard and
covered with snow; men cannot plant me now, and therefore I have been
put up here under shelter till the spring-time comes! How thoughtful
that is! How kind man is, after all! If it only were not so dark here,
and so terribly lonely! Not even a hare! And out in the woods it was
so pleasant, when the snow was on the ground, and the hare leaped by;
yes--even when he jumped over me; but I did not like it then! It is
really terribly lonely here!”
“Squeak! Squeak!” said a little Mouse, at the same moment, peeping out
of his hole. And then another little one came. They snuffed about the
Fir Tree, and rustled among the branches.
“It is dreadfully cold,” said the Mouse. “But for that, it would be
delightful here, old Fir, wouldn’t it?”
“I am by no means old,” said the Fir Tree. “There’s many a one
considerably older than I am.”
“Where do you come from,” asked the Mice; “and what can you do?” They
were so extremely curious. “Tell us about the most beautiful spot on the
earth. Have you never been there? Were you never in the larder, where
cheeses lie on the shelves, and hams hang from above; where one dances
about on tallow candles: that place where one enters lean, and comes out
again fat and portly?”
“I know no such place,” said the Tree. “But I know the wood, where the
sun shines and where the little birds sing.” And then he told all about
his youth; and the little Mice had never heard the like before; and they
listened and said,
“Well, to be sure! How much you have seen! How happy you must have
been!”
“I!” said the Fir Tree, thinking over what he had himself related.
“Yes, in reality those were happy times.” And then he told about
Christmas-eve, when he was decked out with cakes and candles.
“Oh,” said the little Mice, “how fortunate you have been, old Fir Tree!”
“I am by no means old,” said he. “I came from the wood this winter; I am
in my prime, and am only rather short for my age.”
“What delightful stories you know,” said the Mice: and the next night
they came with four other little Mice, who were to hear what the Tree
recounted: and the more he related, the more he remembered himself; and
it appeared as if those times had really been happy times. “But they may
still come--they may still come! Humpy-Dumpy fell downstairs, and yet
he got a princess!” and he thought at the moment of a nice little Birch
Tree growing out in the woods: to the Fir, that would be a real charming
“Who is Humpy-Dumpy?” asked the Mice. So then the Fir Tree told the
whole fairy tale, for he could remember every single word of it; and the
little Mice jumped for joy up to the very top of the Tree. Next night
two more Mice came, and on Sunday two Rats even; but they said the
stories were not interesting, which vexed the little Mice; and they,
too, now began to think them not so very amusing either.
“Do you know only one story?” asked the Rats.
“Only that one,” answered the Tree. “I heard it on my happiest evening;
but I did not then know how happy I was.”
“It is a very stupid story! Don’t you know one about bacon and tallow
candles? Can’t you tell any larder stories?”
“No,” said the Tree.
“Then good-bye,” said the Rats; and they went home.
At last the little Mice stayed away also; and the Tree sighed: “After
all, it was very pleasant when the sleek little Mice sat round me, and
listened to what I told them. Now that too is over. But I will take good
care to enjoy myself when I am brought out again.”
But when was that to be? Why, one morning there came a quantity of
people and set to work in the loft. The trunks were moved, the tree was
pulled out and thrown--rather hard, it is true--down on the floor, but a
man drew him towards the stairs, where the daylight shone.
“Now a merry life will begin again,” thought the Tree. He felt the fresh
air, the first sunbeam--and now he was out in the courtyard. All passed
so quickly, there was so much going on around him, the Tree quite forgot
to look to himself. The court adjoined a garden, and all was in flower;
the roses hung so fresh and odorous over the balustrade, the lindens
were in blossom, the Swallows flew by, and said, “Quirre-vit! My husband
is come!” but it was not the Fir Tree that they meant.
“Now, then, I shall really enjoy life,” said he exultingly, and spread
out his branches; but, alas, they were all withered and yellow! It was
in a corner that he lay, among weeds and nettles. The golden star of
tinsel was still on the top of the Tree, and glittered in the sunshine.
In the court-yard some of the merry children were playing who had danced
at Christmas round the Fir Tree, and were so glad at the sight of him.
One of the youngest ran and tore off the golden star.
“Only look what is still on the ugly old Christmas tree!” said he,
trampling on the branches, so that they all cracked beneath his feet.
And the Tree beheld all the beauty of the flowers, and the freshness in
the garden; he beheld himself, and wished he had remained in his dark
corner in the loft; he thought of his first youth in the wood, of the
merry Christmas-eve, and of the little Mice who had listened with so
much pleasure to the story of Humpy-Dumpy.
“‘Tis over--‘tis past!” said the poor Tree. “Had I but rejoiced when I
had reason to do so! But now ‘tis past, ‘tis past!”
And the gardener’s boy chopped the Tree into small pieces; there was a
whole heap lying there. The wood flamed up splendidly under the large
brewing copper, and it sighed so deeply! Each sigh was like a shot.
The boys played about in the court, and the youngest wore the gold star
on his breast which the Tree had had on the happiest evening of his
life. However, that was over now--the Tree gone, the story at an end.
All, all was over--every tale must end at last.
THE SNOW QUEEN
FIRST STORY. Which Treats of a Mirror and of the Splinters
Now then, let us begin. When we are at the end of the story, we shall
know more than we know now: but to begin.
Once upon a time there was a wicked sprite, indeed he was the most
mischievous of all sprites. One day he was in a very good humor, for
he had made a mirror with the power of causing all that was good and
beautiful when it was reflected therein, to look poor and mean; but
that which was good-for-nothing and looked ugly was shown magnified
and increased in ugliness. In this mirror the most beautiful landscapes
looked like boiled spinach, and the best persons were turned into
frights, or appeared to stand on their heads; their faces were so
distorted that they were not to be recognised; and if anyone had a mole,
you might be sure that it would be magnified and spread over both nose
and mouth.
“That’s glorious fun!” said the sprite. If a good thought passed through
a man’s mind, then a grin was seen in the mirror, and the sprite laughed
heartily at his clever discovery. All the little sprites who went to his
school--for he kept a sprite school--told each other that a miracle had
happened; and that now only, as they thought, it would be possible to
see how the world really looked. They ran about with the mirror; and at
last there was not a land or a person who was not represented distorted
in the mirror. So then they thought they would fly up to the sky,
and have a joke there. The higher they flew with the mirror, the more
terribly it grinned: they could hardly hold it fast. Higher and higher
still they flew, nearer and nearer to the stars, when suddenly the
mirror shook so terribly with grinning, that it flew out of their hands
and fell to the earth, where it was dashed in a hundred million and more
pieces. And now it worked much more evil than before; for some of these
pieces were hardly so large as a grain of sand, and they flew about in
the wide world, and when they got into people’s eyes, there they stayed;
and then people saw everything perverted, or only had an eye for that
which was evil. This happened because the very smallest bit had the
same power which the whole mirror had possessed. Some persons even got
a splinter in their heart, and then it made one shudder, for their heart
became like a lump of ice. Some of the broken pieces were so large that
they were used for windowpanes, through which one could not see one’s
friends. Other pieces were put in spectacles; and that was a sad affair
when people put on their glasses to see well and rightly. Then the
wicked sprite laughed till he almost choked, for all this tickled his
fancy. The fine splinters still flew about in the air: and now we shall
hear what happened next.
SECOND STORY. A Little Boy and a Little Girl
In a large town, where there are so many houses, and so many people,
that there is no roof left for everybody to have a little garden; and
where, on this account, most persons are obliged to content themselves
with flowers in pots; there lived two little children, who had a garden
somewhat larger than a flower-pot. They were not brother and sister; but
they cared for each other as much as if they were. Their parents lived
exactly opposite. They inhabited two garrets; and where the roof of the
one house joined that of the other, and the gutter ran along the extreme
end of it, there was to each house a small window: one needed only to
step over the gutter to get from one window to the other.
The children’s parents had large wooden boxes there, in which vegetables
for the kitchen were planted, and little rosetrees besides: there was a
rose in each box, and they grew splendidly. They now thought of placing
the boxes across the gutter, so that they nearly reached from one window
to the other, and looked just like two walls of flowers. The tendrils
of the peas hung down over the boxes; and the rose-trees shot up long
branches, twined round the windows, and then bent towards each other: it
was almost like a triumphant arch of foliage and flowers. The boxes were
very high, and the children knew that they must not creep over them; so
they often obtained permission to get out of the windows to each other,
and to sit on their little stools among the roses, where they could play
delightfully. In winter there was an end of this pleasure. The windows
were often frozen over; but then they heated copper farthings on the
stove, and laid the hot farthing on the windowpane, and then they had a
capital peep-hole, quite nicely rounded; and out of each peeped a gentle
friendly eye--it was the little boy and the little girl who were looking
out. His name was Kay, hers was Gerda. In summer, with one jump, they
could get to each other; but in winter they were obliged first to
go down the long stairs, and then up the long stairs again: and
out-of-doors there was quite a snow-storm.
“It is the white bees that are swarming,” said Kay’s old grandmother.
“Do the white bees choose a queen?” asked the little boy; for he knew
that the honey-bees always have one.
“Yes,” said the grandmother, “she flies where the swarm hangs in the
thickest clusters. She is the largest of all; and she can never remain
quietly on the earth, but goes up again into the black clouds. Many a
winter’s night she flies through the streets of the town, and peeps in
at the windows; and they then freeze in so wondrous a manner that they
look like flowers.”
“Yes, I have seen it,” said both the children; and so they knew that it
was true.
“Can the Snow Queen come in?” said the little girl.
“Only let her come in!” said the little boy. “Then I’d put her on the
stove, and she’d melt.”
And then his grandmother patted his head and told him other stories.
In the evening, when little Kay was at home, and half undressed, he
climbed up on the chair by the window, and peeped out of the little
hole. A few snow-flakes were falling, and one, the largest of all,
remained lying on the edge of a flower-pot.
The flake of snow grew larger and larger; and at last it was like a
young lady, dressed in the finest white gauze, made of a million little
flakes like stars. She was so beautiful and delicate, but she was of
ice, of dazzling, sparkling ice; yet she lived; her eyes gazed fixedly,
like two stars; but there was neither quiet nor repose in them. She
nodded towards the window, and beckoned with her hand. The little boy
was frightened, and jumped down from the chair; it seemed to him as if,
at the same moment, a large bird flew past the window.
The next day it was a sharp frost--and then the spring came; the sun
shone, the green leaves appeared, the swallows built their nests, the
windows were opened, and the little children again sat in their pretty
garden, high up on the leads at the top of the house.
That summer the roses flowered in unwonted beauty. The little girl had
learned a hymn, in which there was something about roses; and then she
thought of her own flowers; and she sang the verse to the little boy,
who then sang it with her:
     “The rose in the valley is blooming so sweet,
     And angels descend there the children to greet.”
And the children held each other by the hand, kissed the roses, looked
up at the clear sunshine, and spoke as though they really saw angels
there. What lovely summer-days those were! How delightful to be out in
the air, near the fresh rose-bushes, that seem as if they would never
finish blossoming!
Kay and Gerda looked at the picture-book full of beasts and of birds;
and it was then--the clock in the church-tower was just striking
five--that Kay said, “Oh! I feel such a sharp pain in my heart; and now
something has got into my eye!”
The little girl put her arms around his neck. He winked his eyes; now
there was nothing to be seen.
“I think it is out now,” said he; but it was not. It was just one of
those pieces of glass from the magic mirror that had got into his eye;
and poor Kay had got another piece right in his heart. It will soon
become like ice. It did not hurt any longer, but there it was.
“What are you crying for?” asked he. “You look so ugly! There’s nothing
the matter with me. Ah,” said he at once, “that rose is cankered! And
look, this one is quite crooked! After all, these roses are very ugly!
They are just like the box they are planted in!” And then he gave the
box a good kick with his foot, and pulled both the roses up.
“What are you doing?” cried the little girl; and as he perceived her
fright, he pulled up another rose, got in at the window, and hastened
off from dear little Gerda.
Afterwards, when she brought her picture-book, he asked, “What horrid
beasts have you there?” And if his grandmother told them stories, he
always interrupted her; besides, if he could manage it, he would get
behind her, put on her spectacles, and imitate her way of speaking; he
copied all her ways, and then everybody laughed at him. He was soon able
to imitate the gait and manner of everyone in the street. Everything
that was peculiar and displeasing in them--that Kay knew how to imitate:
and at such times all the people said, “The boy is certainly very
clever!” But it was the glass he had got in his eye; the glass that was
sticking in his heart, which made him tease even little Gerda, whose
whole soul was devoted to him.
His games now were quite different to what they had formerly been, they
were so very knowing. One winter’s day, when the flakes of snow were
flying about, he spread the skirts of his blue coat, and caught the snow
as it fell.
“Look through this glass, Gerda,” said he. And every flake seemed
larger, and appeared like a magnificent flower, or beautiful star; it
was splendid to look at!
“Look, how clever!” said Kay. “That’s much more interesting than real
flowers! They are as exact as possible; there is not a fault in them, if
they did not melt!”
It was not long after this, that Kay came one day with large gloves on,
and his little sledge at his back, and bawled right into Gerda’s ears,
“I have permission to go out into the square where the others are
playing”; and off he was in a moment.
There, in the market-place, some of the boldest of the boys used to tie
their sledges to the carts as they passed by, and so they were pulled
along, and got a good ride. It was so capital! Just as they were in the
very height of their amusement, a large sledge passed by: it was painted
quite white, and there was someone in it wrapped up in a rough white
mantle of fur, with a rough white fur cap on his head. The sledge drove
round the square twice, and Kay tied on his sledge as quickly as he
could, and off he drove with it. On they went quicker and quicker into
the next street; and the person who drove turned round to Kay, and
nodded to him in a friendly manner, just as if they knew each other.
Every time he was going to untie his sledge, the person nodded to him,
and then Kay sat quiet; and so on they went till they came outside
the gates of the town. Then the snow began to fall so thickly that the
little boy could not see an arm’s length before him, but still on he
went: when suddenly he let go the string he held in his hand in order
to get loose from the sledge, but it was of no use; still the little
vehicle rushed on with the quickness of the wind. He then cried as loud
as he could, but no one heard him; the snow drifted and the sledge flew
on, and sometimes it gave a jerk as though they were driving over hedges
and ditches. He was quite frightened, and he tried to repeat the
Lord’s Prayer; but all he could do, he was only able to remember the
multiplication table.
The snow-flakes grew larger and larger, till at last they looked just
like great white fowls. Suddenly they flew on one side; the large sledge
stopped, and the person who drove rose up. It was a lady; her cloak and
cap were of snow. She was tall and of slender figure, and of a dazzling
whiteness. It was the Snow Queen.
“We have travelled fast,” said she; “but it is freezingly cold. Come
under my bearskin.” And she put him in the sledge beside her,
wrapped the fur round him, and he felt as though he were sinking in a
snow-wreath.
“Are you still cold?” asked she; and then she kissed his forehead.
Ah! it was colder than ice; it penetrated to his very heart, which was
already almost a frozen lump; it seemed to him as if he were about to
die--but a moment more and it was quite congenial to him, and he did not
remark the cold that was around him.
“My sledge! Do not forget my sledge!” It was the first thing he thought
of. It was there tied to one of the white chickens, who flew along with
it on his back behind the large sledge. The Snow Queen kissed Kay once
more, and then he forgot little Gerda, grandmother, and all whom he had
left at his home.
“Now you will have no more kisses,” said she, “or else I should kiss you
to death!”
Kay looked at her. She was very beautiful; a more clever, or a more
lovely countenance he could not fancy to himself; and she no longer
appeared of ice as before, when she sat outside the window, and beckoned
to him; in his eyes she was perfect, he did not fear her at all, and
told her that he could calculate in his head and with fractions, even;
that he knew the number of square miles there were in the different
countries, and how many inhabitants they contained; and she smiled while
he spoke. It then seemed to him as if what he knew was not enough, and
he looked upwards in the large huge empty space above him, and on she
flew with him; flew high over the black clouds, while the storm moaned
and whistled as though it were singing some old tune. On they flew
over woods and lakes, over seas, and many lands; and beneath them the
chilling storm rushed fast, the wolves howled, the snow crackled; above
them flew large screaming crows, but higher up appeared the moon, quite
large and bright; and it was on it that Kay gazed during the long long
winter’s night; while by day he slept at the feet of the Snow Queen.
THIRD STORY. Of the Flower-Garden At the Old Woman’s Who Understood
Witchcraft
But what became of little Gerda when Kay did not return? Where could he
be? Nobody knew; nobody could give any intelligence. All the boys knew
was, that they had seen him tie his sledge to another large and splendid
one, which drove down the street and out of the town. Nobody knew
where he was; many sad tears were shed, and little Gerda wept long and
bitterly; at last she said he must be dead; that he had been drowned in
the river which flowed close to the town. Oh! those were very long and
dismal winter evenings!
At last spring came, with its warm sunshine.
“Kay is dead and gone!” said little Gerda.
“That I don’t believe,” said the Sunshine.
“Kay is dead and gone!” said she to the Swallows.
“That I don’t believe,” said they: and at last little Gerda did not
think so any longer either.
“I’ll put on my red shoes,” said she, one morning; “Kay has never seen
them, and then I’ll go down to the river and ask there.”
It was quite early; she kissed her old grandmother, who was still
asleep, put on her red shoes, and went alone to the river.
“Is it true that you have taken my little playfellow? I will make you a
present of my red shoes, if you will give him back to me.”
And, as it seemed to her, the blue waves nodded in a strange manner;
then she took off her red shoes, the most precious things she possessed,
and threw them both into the river. But they fell close to the bank, and
the little waves bore them immediately to land; it was as if the stream
would not take what was dearest to her; for in reality it had not got
little Kay; but Gerda thought that she had not thrown the shoes out far
enough, so she clambered into a boat which lay among the rushes, went
to the farthest end, and threw out the shoes. But the boat was not
fastened, and the motion which she occasioned, made it drift from the
shore. She observed this, and hastened to get back; but before she could
do so, the boat was more than a yard from the land, and was gliding
quickly onward.
Little Gerda was very frightened, and began to cry; but no one heard her
except the sparrows, and they could not carry her to land; but they flew
along the bank, and sang as if to comfort her, “Here we are! Here we
are!” The boat drifted with the stream, little Gerda sat quite still
without shoes, for they were swimming behind the boat, but she could not
reach them, because the boat went much faster than they did.
The banks on both sides were beautiful; lovely flowers, venerable trees,
and slopes with sheep and cows, but not a human being was to be seen.
“Perhaps the river will carry me to little Kay,” said she; and then
she grew less sad. She rose, and looked for many hours at the beautiful
green banks. Presently she sailed by a large cherry-orchard, where was
a little cottage with curious red and blue windows; it was thatched,
and before it two wooden soldiers stood sentry, and presented arms when
anyone went past.
Gerda called to them, for she thought they were alive; but they, of
course, did not answer. She came close to them, for the stream drifted
the boat quite near the land.
Gerda called still louder, and an old woman then came out of the
cottage, leaning upon a crooked stick. She had a large broad-brimmed hat
on, painted with the most splendid flowers.
“Poor little child!” said the old woman. “How did you get upon the large
rapid river, to be driven about so in the wide world!” And then the
old woman went into the water, caught hold of the boat with her crooked
stick, drew it to the bank, and lifted little Gerda out.
And Gerda was so glad to be on dry land again; but she was rather afraid
of the strange old woman.
“But come and tell me who you are, and how you came here,” said she.
And Gerda told her all; and the old woman shook her head and said,
“A-hem! a-hem!” and when Gerda had told her everything, and asked her if
she had not seen little Kay, the woman answered that he had not passed
there, but he no doubt would come; and she told her not to be cast down,
but taste her cherries, and look at her flowers, which were finer than
any in a picture-book, each of which could tell a whole story. She then
took Gerda by the hand, led her into the little cottage, and locked the
The windows were very high up; the glass was red, blue, and green, and
the sunlight shone through quite wondrously in all sorts of colors. On
the table stood the most exquisite cherries, and Gerda ate as many as
she chose, for she had permission to do so. While she was eating, the
old woman combed her hair with a golden comb, and her hair curled and
shone with a lovely golden color around that sweet little face, which
was so round and so like a rose.
“I have often longed for such a dear little girl,” said the old woman.
“Now you shall see how well we agree together”; and while she combed
little Gerda’s hair, the child forgot her foster-brother Kay more and
more, for the old woman understood magic; but she was no evil being, she
only practised witchcraft a little for her own private amusement, and
now she wanted very much to keep little Gerda. She therefore went out
in the garden, stretched out her crooked stick towards the rose-bushes,
which, beautifully as they were blowing, all sank into the earth and no
one could tell where they had stood. The old woman feared that if Gerda
should see the roses, she would then think of her own, would remember
little Kay, and run away from her.
She now led Gerda into the flower-garden. Oh, what odour and what
loveliness was there! Every flower that one could think of, and of every
season, stood there in fullest bloom; no picture-book could be gayer or
more beautiful. Gerda jumped for joy, and played till the sun set behind
the tall cherry-tree; she then had a pretty bed, with a red silken
coverlet filled with blue violets. She fell asleep, and had as pleasant
dreams as ever a queen on her wedding-day.
The next morning she went to play with the flowers in the warm sunshine,
and thus passed away a day. Gerda knew every flower; and, numerous as
they were, it still seemed to Gerda that one was wanting, though she
did not know which. One day while she was looking at the hat of the old
woman painted with flowers, the most beautiful of them all seemed to her
to be a rose. The old woman had forgotten to take it from her hat
when she made the others vanish in the earth. But so it is when one’s
thoughts are not collected. “What!” said Gerda. “Are there no roses
here?” and she ran about amongst the flowerbeds, and looked, and looked,
but there was not one to be found. She then sat down and wept; but her
hot tears fell just where a rose-bush had sunk; and when her warm tears
watered the ground, the tree shot up suddenly as fresh and blooming as
when it had been swallowed up. Gerda kissed the roses, thought of her
own dear roses at home, and with them of little Kay.
“Oh, how long I have stayed!” said the little girl. “I intended to look
for Kay! Don’t you know where he is?” she asked of the roses. “Do you
think he is dead and gone?”
“Dead he certainly is not,” said the Roses. “We have been in the earth
where all the dead are, but Kay was not there.”
“Many thanks!” said little Gerda; and she went to the other flowers,
looked into their cups, and asked, “Don’t you know where little Kay is?”
But every flower stood in the sunshine, and dreamed its own fairy tale
or its own story: and they all told her very many things, but not one
knew anything of Kay.
Well, what did the Tiger-Lily say?
“Hearest thou not the drum? Bum! Bum! Those are the only two tones.
Always bum! Bum! Hark to the plaintive song of the old woman, to the
call of the priests! The Hindoo woman in her long robe stands upon the
funeral pile; the flames rise around her and her dead husband, but the
Hindoo woman thinks on the living one in the surrounding circle; on him
whose eyes burn hotter than the flames--on him, the fire of whose eyes
pierces her heart more than the flames which soon will burn her body to
ashes. Can the heart’s flame die in the flame of the funeral pile?”
“I don’t understand that at all,” said little Gerda.
“That is my story,” said the Lily.
What did the Convolvulus say?
“Projecting over a narrow mountain-path there hangs an old feudal
castle. Thick evergreens grow on the dilapidated walls, and around the
altar, where a lovely maiden is standing: she bends over the railing and
looks out upon the rose. No fresher rose hangs on the branches than she;
no appleblossom carried away by the wind is more buoyant! How her silken
robe is rustling!
“‘Is he not yet come?’”
“Is it Kay that you mean?” asked little Gerda.
“I am speaking about my story--about my dream,” answered the
Convolvulus.
What did the Snowdrops say?
“Between the trees a long board is hanging--it is a swing. Two little
girls are sitting in it, and swing themselves backwards and forwards;
their frocks are as white as snow, and long green silk ribands flutter
from their bonnets. Their brother, who is older than they are, stands up
in the swing; he twines his arms round the cords to hold himself fast,
for in one hand he has a little cup, and in the other a clay-pipe. He is
blowing soap-bubbles. The swing moves, and the bubbles float in charming
changing colors: the last is still hanging to the end of the pipe, and
rocks in the breeze. The swing moves. The little black dog, as light as
a soap-bubble, jumps up on his hind legs to try to get into the swing.
It moves, the dog falls down, barks, and is angry. They tease him; the
bubble bursts! A swing, a bursting bubble--such is my song!”
“What you relate may be very pretty, but you tell it in so melancholy a
manner, and do not mention Kay.”
What do the Hyacinths say?
“There were once upon a time three sisters, quite transparent, and very
beautiful. The robe of the one was red, that of the second blue, and
that of the third white. They danced hand in hand beside the calm
lake in the clear moonshine. They were not elfin maidens, but mortal
children. A sweet fragrance was smelt, and the maidens vanished in the
wood; the fragrance grew stronger--three coffins, and in them three
lovely maidens, glided out of the forest and across the lake: the
shining glow-worms flew around like little floating lights. Do the
dancing maidens sleep, or are they dead? The odour of the flowers says
they are corpses; the evening bell tolls for the dead!”
“You make me quite sad,” said little Gerda. “I cannot help thinking of
the dead maidens. Oh! is little Kay really dead? The Roses have been in
the earth, and they say no.”
“Ding, dong!” sounded the Hyacinth bells. “We do not toll for little
Kay; we do not know him. That is our way of singing, the only one we
have.”
And Gerda went to the Ranunculuses, that looked forth from among the
shining green leaves.
“You are a little bright sun!” said Gerda. “Tell me if you know where I
can find my playfellow.”
And the Ranunculus shone brightly, and looked again at Gerda. What
song could the Ranunculus sing? It was one that said nothing about Kay
“In a small court the bright sun was shining in the first days of
spring. The beams glided down the white walls of a neighbor’s house, and
close by the fresh yellow flowers were growing, shining like gold in
the warm sun-rays. An old grandmother was sitting in the air; her
grand-daughter, the poor and lovely servant just come for a short visit.
She knows her grandmother. There was gold, pure virgin gold in that
blessed kiss. There, that is my little story,” said the Ranunculus.
“My poor old grandmother!” sighed Gerda. “Yes, she is longing for me,
no doubt: she is sorrowing for me, as she did for little Kay. But I
will soon come home, and then I will bring Kay with me. It is of no use
asking the flowers; they only know their own old rhymes, and can tell me
nothing.” And she tucked up her frock, to enable her to run quicker; but
the Narcissus gave her a knock on the leg, just as she was going to
jump over it. So she stood still, looked at the long yellow flower, and
asked, “You perhaps know something?” and she bent down to the Narcissus.
And what did it say?
“I can see myself--I can see myself! Oh, how odorous I am! Up in the
little garret there stands, half-dressed, a little Dancer. She stands
now on one leg, now on both; she despises the whole world; yet she lives
only in imagination. She pours water out of the teapot over a piece of
stuff which she holds in her hand; it is the bodice; cleanliness is a
fine thing. The white dress is hanging on the hook; it was washed in the
teapot, and dried on the roof. She puts it on, ties a saffron-colored
kerchief round her neck, and then the gown looks whiter. I can see
myself--I can see myself!”
“That’s nothing to me,” said little Gerda. “That does not concern me.”
 And then off she ran to the further end of the garden.
The gate was locked, but she shook the rusted bolt till it was loosened,
and the gate opened; and little Gerda ran off barefooted into the wide
world. She looked round her thrice, but no one followed her. At last she
could run no longer; she sat down on a large stone, and when she looked
about her, she saw that the summer had passed; it was late in the
autumn, but that one could not remark in the beautiful garden, where
there was always sunshine, and where there were flowers the whole year
round.
“Dear me, how long I have staid!” said Gerda. “Autumn is come. I must
not rest any longer.” And she got up to go further.
Oh, how tender and wearied her little feet were! All around it looked
so cold and raw: the long willow-leaves were quite yellow, and the fog
dripped from them like water; one leaf fell after the other: the sloes
only stood full of fruit, which set one’s teeth on edge. Oh, how dark
and comfortless it was in the dreary world!
FOURTH STORY. The Prince and Princess
Gerda was obliged to rest herself again, when, exactly opposite to her,
a large Raven came hopping over the white snow. He had long been looking
at Gerda and shaking his head; and now he said, “Caw! Caw!” Good day!
Good day! He could not say it better; but he felt a sympathy for the
little girl, and asked her where she was going all alone. The word
“alone” Gerda understood quite well, and felt how much was expressed
by it; so she told the Raven her whole history, and asked if he had not
seen Kay.
The Raven nodded very gravely, and said, “It may be--it may be!”
“What, do you really think so?” cried the little girl; and she nearly
squeezed the Raven to death, so much did she kiss him.
“Gently, gently,” said the Raven. “I think I know; I think that it may
be little Kay. But now he has forgotten you for the Princess.”
“Does he live with a Princess?” asked Gerda.
“Yes--listen,” said the Raven; “but it will be difficult for me to
speak your language. If you understand the Raven language I can tell you
better.”
“No, I have not learnt it,” said Gerda; “but my grandmother understands
it, and she can speak gibberish too. I wish I had learnt it.”
“No matter,” said the Raven; “I will tell you as well as I can; however,
it will be bad enough.” And then he told all he knew.
“In the kingdom where we now are there lives a Princess, who is
extraordinarily clever; for she has read all the newspapers in the whole
world, and has forgotten them again--so clever is she. She was lately,
it is said, sitting on her throne--which is not very amusing after
all--when she began humming an old tune, and it was just, ‘Oh, why
should I not be married?’ ‘That song is not without its meaning,’ said
she, and so then she was determined to marry; but she would have a
husband who knew how to give an answer when he was spoken to--not
one who looked only as if he were a great personage, for that is so
tiresome. She then had all the ladies of the court drummed together; and
when they heard her intention, all were very pleased, and said, ‘We are
very glad to hear it; it is the very thing we were thinking of.’ You may
believe every word I say,” said the Raven; “for I have a tame sweetheart
that hops about in the palace quite free, and it was she who told me all
this.
“The newspapers appeared forthwith with a border of hearts and the
initials of the Princess; and therein you might read that every
good-looking young man was at liberty to come to the palace and speak to
the Princess; and he who spoke in such wise as showed he felt himself at
home there, that one the Princess would choose for her husband.
“Yes, Yes,” said the Raven, “you may believe it; it is as true as I am
sitting here. People came in crowds; there was a crush and a hurry, but
no one was successful either on the first or second day. They could all
talk well enough when they were out in the street; but as soon as
they came inside the palace gates, and saw the guard richly dressed
in silver, and the lackeys in gold on the staircase, and the large
illuminated saloons, then they were abashed; and when they stood before
the throne on which the Princess was sitting, all they could do was
to repeat the last word they had uttered, and to hear it again did not
interest her very much. It was just as if the people within were under
a charm, and had fallen into a trance till they came out again into the
street; for then--oh, then--they could chatter enough. There was a whole
row of them standing from the town-gates to the palace. I was there
myself to look,” said the Raven. “They grew hungry and thirsty; but from
the palace they got nothing whatever, not even a glass of water. Some
of the cleverest, it is true, had taken bread and butter with them:
but none shared it with his neighbor, for each thought, ‘Let him look
hungry, and then the Princess won’t have him.’”
“But Kay--little Kay,” said Gerda, “when did he come? Was he among the
number?”
“Patience, patience; we are just come to him. It was on the third day
when a little personage without horse or equipage, came marching right
boldly up to the palace; his eyes shone like yours, he had beautiful
long hair, but his clothes were very shabby.”
“That was Kay,” cried Gerda, with a voice of delight. “Oh, now I’ve
found him!” and she clapped her hands for joy.
“He had a little knapsack at his back,” said the Raven.
“No, that was certainly his sledge,” said Gerda; “for when he went away
he took his sledge with him.”
“That may be,” said the Raven; “I did not examine him so minutely; but
I know from my tame sweetheart, that when he came into the court-yard
of the palace, and saw the body-guard in silver, the lackeys on the
staircase, he was not the least abashed; he nodded, and said to them,
‘It must be very tiresome to stand on the stairs; for my part, I shall
go in.’ The saloons were gleaming with lustres--privy councillors and
excellencies were walking about barefooted, and wore gold keys; it was
enough to make any one feel uncomfortable. His boots creaked, too, so
loudly, but still he was not at all afraid.”
“That’s Kay for certain,” said Gerda. “I know he had on new boots; I
have heard them creaking in grandmama’s room.”
“Yes, they creaked,” said the Raven. “And on he went boldly up to the
Princess, who was sitting on a pearl as large as a spinning-wheel.
All the ladies of the court, with their attendants and attendants’
attendants, and all the cavaliers, with their gentlemen and gentlemen’s
gentlemen, stood round; and the nearer they stood to the door, the
prouder they looked. It was hardly possible to look at the gentleman’s
gentleman, so very haughtily did he stand in the doorway.”
“It must have been terrible,” said little Gerda. “And did Kay get the
Princess?”
“Were I not a Raven, I should have taken the Princess myself, although
I am promised. It is said he spoke as well as I speak when I talk Raven
language; this I learned from my tame sweetheart. He was bold and nicely
behaved; he had not come to woo the Princess, but only to hear her
wisdom. She pleased him, and he pleased her.”
“Yes, yes; for certain that was Kay,” said Gerda. “He was so clever;
he could reckon fractions in his head. Oh, won’t you take me to the
palace?”
“That is very easily said,” answered the Raven. “But how are we to
manage it? I’ll speak to my tame sweetheart about it: she must advise
us; for so much I must tell you, such a little girl as you are will
never get permission to enter.”
“Oh, yes I shall,” said Gerda; “when Kay hears that I am here, he will
come out directly to fetch me.”
“Wait for me here on these steps,” said the Raven. He moved his head
backwards and forwards and flew away.
The evening was closing in when the Raven returned. “Caw--caw!” said he.
“She sends you her compliments; and here is a roll for you. She took
it out of the kitchen, where there is bread enough. You are hungry,
no doubt. It is not possible for you to enter the palace, for you are
barefooted: the guards in silver, and the lackeys in gold, would not
allow it; but do not cry, you shall come in still. My sweetheart knows a
little back stair that leads to the bedchamber, and she knows where she
can get the key of it.”
And they went into the garden in the large avenue, where one leaf was
falling after the other; and when the lights in the palace had all
gradually disappeared, the Raven led little Gerda to the back door,
which stood half open.
Oh, how Gerda’s heart beat with anxiety and longing! It was just as if
she had been about to do something wrong; and yet she only wanted to
know if little Kay was there. Yes, he must be there. She called to mind
his intelligent eyes, and his long hair, so vividly, she could quite see
him as he used to laugh when they were sitting under the roses at home.
“He will, no doubt, be glad to see you--to hear what a long way you have
come for his sake; to know how unhappy all at home were when he did not
come back.”
Oh, what a fright and a joy it was!
They were now on the stairs. A single lamp was burning there; and on the
floor stood the tame Raven, turning her head on every side and looking
at Gerda, who bowed as her grandmother had taught her to do.
“My intended has told me so much good of you, my dear young lady,” said
the tame Raven. “Your tale is very affecting. If you will take the lamp,
I will go before. We will go straight on, for we shall meet no one.”
“I think there is somebody just behind us,” said Gerda; and something
rushed past: it was like shadowy figures on the wall; horses with
flowing manes and thin legs, huntsmen, ladies and gentlemen on
horseback.
“They are only dreams,” said the Raven. “They come to fetch the thoughts
of the high personages to the chase; ‘tis well, for now you can observe
them in bed all the better. But let me find, when you enjoy honor and
distinction, that you possess a grateful heart.”
“Tut! That’s not worth talking about,” said the Raven of the woods.
They now entered the first saloon, which was of rose-colored satin, with
artificial flowers on the wall. Here the dreams were rushing past,
but they hastened by so quickly that Gerda could not see the high
personages. One hall was more magnificent than the other; one might
indeed well be abashed; and at last they came into the bedchamber. The
ceiling of the room resembled a large palm-tree with leaves of glass,
of costly glass; and in the middle, from a thick golden stem, hung two
beds, each of which resembled a lily. One was white, and in this lay the
Princess; the other was red, and it was here that Gerda was to look for
little Kay. She bent back one of the red leaves, and saw a brown neck.
Oh! that was Kay! She called him quite loud by name, held the lamp
towards him--the dreams rushed back again into the chamber--he awoke,
turned his head, and--it was not little Kay!
The Prince was only like him about the neck; but he was young and
handsome. And out of the white lily leaves the Princess peeped, too,
and asked what was the matter. Then little Gerda cried, and told her her
whole history, and all that the Ravens had done for her.
“Poor little thing!” said the Prince and the Princess. They praised the
Ravens very much, and told them they were not at all angry with them,
but they were not to do so again. However, they should have a reward.
“Will you fly about here at liberty,” asked the Princess; “or would you
like to have a fixed appointment as court ravens, with all the broken
bits from the kitchen?”
And both the Ravens nodded, and begged for a fixed appointment; for
they thought of their old age, and said, “It is a good thing to have a
provision for our old days.”
And the Prince got up and let Gerda sleep in his bed, and more than this
he could not do. She folded her little hands and thought, “How good men
and animals are!” and she then fell asleep and slept soundly. All the
dreams flew in again, and they now looked like the angels; they drew
a little sledge, in which little Kay sat and nodded his head; but the
whole was only a dream, and therefore it all vanished as soon as she
awoke.
The next day she was dressed from head to foot in silk and velvet. They
offered to let her stay at the palace, and lead a happy life; but she
begged to have a little carriage with a horse in front, and for a small
pair of shoes; then, she said, she would again go forth in the wide
world and look for Kay.
Shoes and a muff were given her; she was, too, dressed very nicely; and
when she was about to set off, a new carriage stopped before the door.
It was of pure gold, and the arms of the Prince and Princess shone
like a star upon it; the coachman, the footmen, and the outriders, for
outriders were there, too, all wore golden crowns. The Prince and the
Princess assisted her into the carriage themselves, and wished her all
success. The Raven of the woods, who was now married, accompanied her
for the first three miles. He sat beside Gerda, for he could not bear
riding backwards; the other Raven stood in the doorway, and flapped her
wings; she could not accompany Gerda, because she suffered from headache
since she had had a fixed appointment and ate so much. The carriage
was lined inside with sugar-plums, and in the seats were fruits and
gingerbread.
“Farewell! Farewell!” cried Prince and Princess; and Gerda wept, and
the Raven wept. Thus passed the first miles; and then the Raven bade her
farewell, and this was the most painful separation of all. He flew into
a tree, and beat his black wings as long as he could see the carriage,
that shone from afar like a sunbeam.
FIFTH STORY. The Little Robber Maiden
They drove through the dark wood; but the carriage shone like a torch,
and it dazzled the eyes of the robbers, so that they could not bear to
look at it.
“‘Tis gold! ‘Tis gold!” they cried; and they rushed forward, seized
the horses, knocked down the little postilion, the coachman, and the
servants, and pulled little Gerda out of the carriage.
“How plump, how beautiful she is! She must have been fed on
nut-kernels,” said the old female robber, who had a long, scrubby beard,
and bushy eyebrows that hung down over her eyes. “She is as good as a
fatted lamb! How nice she will be!” And then she drew out a knife, the
blade of which shone so that it was quite dreadful to behold.
“Oh!” cried the woman at the same moment. She had been bitten in the ear
by her own little daughter, who hung at her back; and who was so wild
and unmanageable, that it was quite amusing to see her. “You naughty
child!” said the mother: and now she had not time to kill Gerda.
“She shall play with me,” said the little robber child. “She shall give
me her muff, and her pretty frock; she shall sleep in my bed!” And then
she gave her mother another bite, so that she jumped, and ran round with
the pain; and the Robbers laughed, and said, “Look, how she is dancing
with the little one!”
“I will go into the carriage,” said the little robber maiden; and she
would have her will, for she was very spoiled and very headstrong. She
and Gerda got in; and then away they drove over the stumps of felled
trees, deeper and deeper into the woods. The little robber maiden was as
tall as Gerda, but stronger, broader-shouldered, and of dark complexion;
her eyes were quite black; they looked almost melancholy. She embraced
little Gerda, and said, “They shall not kill you as long as I am not
displeased with you. You are, doubtless, a Princess?”
“No,” said little Gerda; who then related all that had happened to her,
and how much she cared about little Kay.
The little robber maiden looked at her with a serious air, nodded her
head slightly, and said, “They shall not kill you, even if I am angry
with you: then I will do it myself”; and she dried Gerda’s eyes, and put
both her hands in the handsome muff, which was so soft and warm.
At length the carriage stopped. They were in the midst of the court-yard
of a robber’s castle. It was full of cracks from top to bottom; and out
of the openings magpies and rooks were flying; and the great bull-dogs,
each of which looked as if he could swallow a man, jumped up, but they
did not bark, for that was forbidden.
In the midst of the large, old, smoking hall burnt a great fire on the
stone floor. The smoke disappeared under the stones, and had to seek
its own egress. In an immense caldron soup was boiling; and rabbits and
hares were being roasted on a spit.
“You shall sleep with me to-night, with all my animals,” said the little
robber maiden. They had something to eat and drink; and then went into
a corner, where straw and carpets were lying. Beside them, on laths and
perches, sat nearly a hundred pigeons, all asleep, seemingly; but yet
they moved a little when the robber maiden came. “They are all mine,”
 said she, at the same time seizing one that was next to her by the legs
and shaking it so that its wings fluttered. “Kiss it,” cried the little
girl, and flung the pigeon in Gerda’s face. “Up there is the rabble of
the wood,” continued she, pointing to several laths which were fastened
before a hole high up in the wall; “that’s the rabble; they would all
fly away immediately, if they were not well fastened in. And here is my
dear old Bac”; and she laid hold of the horns of a reindeer, that had a
bright copper ring round its neck, and was tethered to the spot. “We are
obliged to lock this fellow in too, or he would make his escape. Every
evening I tickle his neck with my sharp knife; he is so frightened at
it!” and the little girl drew forth a long knife, from a crack in the
wall, and let it glide over the Reindeer’s neck. The poor animal kicked;
the girl laughed, and pulled Gerda into bed with her.
“Do you intend to keep your knife while you sleep?” asked Gerda; looking
at it rather fearfully.
“I always sleep with the knife,” said the little robber maiden. “There
is no knowing what may happen. But tell me now, once more, all about
little Kay; and why you have started off in the wide world alone.” And
Gerda related all, from the very beginning: the Wood-pigeons cooed above
in their cage, and the others slept. The little robber maiden wound her
arm round Gerda’s neck, held the knife in the other hand, and snored so
loud that everybody could hear her; but Gerda could not close her eyes,
for she did not know whether she was to live or die. The robbers sat
round the fire, sang and drank; and the old female robber jumped about
so, that it was quite dreadful for Gerda to see her.
Then the Wood-pigeons said, “Coo! Coo! We have seen little Kay! A white
hen carries his sledge; he himself sat in the carriage of the Snow
Queen, who passed here, down just over the wood, as we lay in our nest.
She blew upon us young ones; and all died except we two. Coo! Coo!”
“What is that you say up there?” cried little Gerda. “Where did the Snow
Queen go to? Do you know anything about it?”
“She is no doubt gone to Lapland; for there is always snow and ice
there. Only ask the Reindeer, who is tethered there.”
“Ice and snow is there! There it is, glorious and beautiful!” said the
Reindeer. “One can spring about in the large shining valleys! The Snow
Queen has her summer-tent there; but her fixed abode is high up towards
the North Pole, on the Island called Spitzbergen.”
“Oh, Kay! Poor little Kay!” sighed Gerda.
“Do you choose to be quiet?” said the robber maiden. “If you don’t, I
shall make you.”
In the morning Gerda told her all that the Wood-pigeons had said; and
the little maiden looked very serious, but she nodded her head, and
said, “That’s no matter--that’s no matter. Do you know where Lapland
lies!” she asked of the Reindeer.
“Who should know better than I?” said the animal; and his eyes rolled in
his head. “I was born and bred there--there I leapt about on the fields
of snow.”
“Listen,” said the robber maiden to Gerda. “You see that the men are
gone; but my mother is still here, and will remain. However, towards
morning she takes a draught out of the large flask, and then she sleeps
a little: then I will do something for you.” She now jumped out of bed,
flew to her mother; with her arms round her neck, and pulling her by the
beard, said, “Good morrow, my own sweet nanny-goat of a mother.” And her
mother took hold of her nose, and pinched it till it was red and blue;
but this was all done out of pure love.
When the mother had taken a sup at her flask, and was having a nap, the
little robber maiden went to the Reindeer, and said, “I should very much
like to give you still many a tickling with the sharp knife, for then
you are so amusing; however, I will untether you, and help you out,
so that you may go back to Lapland. But you must make good use of your
legs; and take this little girl for me to the palace of the Snow Queen,
where her playfellow is. You have heard, I suppose, all she said; for
she spoke loud enough, and you were listening.”
The Reindeer gave a bound for joy. The robber maiden lifted up little
Gerda, and took the precaution to bind her fast on the Reindeer’s back;
she even gave her a small cushion to sit on. “Here are your worsted
leggins, for it will be cold; but the muff I shall keep for myself, for
it is so very pretty. But I do not wish you to be cold. Here is a pair
of lined gloves of my mother’s; they just reach up to your elbow. On
with them! Now you look about the hands just like my ugly old mother!”
And Gerda wept for joy.
“I can’t bear to see you fretting,” said the little robber maiden. “This
is just the time when you ought to look pleased. Here are two loaves and
a ham for you, so that you won’t starve.” The bread and the meat were
fastened to the Reindeer’s back; the little maiden opened the door,
called in all the dogs, and then with her knife cut the rope that
fastened the animal, and said to him, “Now, off with you; but take good
care of the little girl!”
And Gerda stretched out her hands with the large wadded gloves towards
the robber maiden, and said, “Farewell!” and the Reindeer flew on over
bush and bramble through the great wood, over moor and heath, as fast as
he could go.
“Ddsa! Ddsa!” was heard in the sky. It was just as if somebody was
sneezing.
“These are my old northern-lights,” said the Reindeer, “look how they
gleam!” And on he now sped still quicker--day and night on he went: the
loaves were consumed, and the ham too; and now they were in Lapland.
SIXTH STORY. The Lapland Woman and the Finland Woman
Suddenly they stopped before a little house, which looked very
miserable. The roof reached to the ground; and the door was so low, that
the family were obliged to creep upon their stomachs when they went in
or out. Nobody was at home except an old Lapland woman, who was dressing
fish by the light of an oil lamp. And the Reindeer told her the whole
of Gerda’s history, but first of all his own; for that seemed to him of
much greater importance. Gerda was so chilled that she could not speak.
“Poor thing,” said the Lapland woman, “you have far to run still. You
have more than a hundred miles to go before you get to Finland; there
the Snow Queen has her country-house, and burns blue lights every
evening. I will give you a few words from me, which I will write on a
dried haberdine, for paper I have none; this you can take with you to
the Finland woman, and she will be able to give you more information
than I can.”
When Gerda had warmed herself, and had eaten and drunk, the Lapland
woman wrote a few words on a dried haberdine, begged Gerda to take care
of them, put her on the Reindeer, bound her fast, and away sprang the
animal. “Ddsa! Ddsa!” was again heard in the air; the most charming
blue lights burned the whole night in the sky, and at last they came to
Finland. They knocked at the chimney of the Finland woman; for as to a
door, she had none.
There was such a heat inside that the Finland woman herself went about
almost naked. She was diminutive and dirty. She immediately loosened
little Gerda’s clothes, pulled off her thick gloves and boots; for
otherwise the heat would have been too great--and after laying a piece
of ice on the Reindeer’s head, read what was written on the fish-skin.
She read it three times: she then knew it by heart; so she put the fish
into the cupboard--for it might very well be eaten, and she never threw
anything away.
Then the Reindeer related his own story first, and afterwards that of
little Gerda; and the Finland woman winked her eyes, but said nothing.
“You are so clever,” said the Reindeer; “you can, I know, twist all the
winds of the world together in a knot. If the seaman loosens one knot,
then he has a good wind; if a second, then it blows pretty stiffly; if
he undoes the third and fourth, then it rages so that the forests are
upturned. Will you give the little maiden a potion, that she may possess
the strength of twelve men, and vanquish the Snow Queen?”
“The strength of twelve men!” said the Finland woman. “Much good that
would be!” Then she went to a cupboard, and drew out a large skin rolled
up. When she had unrolled it, strange characters were to be seen written
thereon; and the Finland woman read at such a rate that the perspiration
trickled down her forehead.
But the Reindeer begged so hard for little Gerda, and Gerda looked so
imploringly with tearful eyes at the Finland woman, that she winked, and
drew the Reindeer aside into a corner, where they whispered together,
while the animal got some fresh ice put on his head.
“‘Tis true little Kay is at the Snow Queen’s, and finds everything there
quite to his taste; and he thinks it the very best place in the world;
but the reason of that is, he has a splinter of glass in his eye, and in
his heart. These must be got out first; otherwise he will never go back
to mankind, and the Snow Queen will retain her power over him.”
“But can you give little Gerda nothing to take which will endue her with
power over the whole?”
“I can give her no more power than what she has already. Don’t you see
how great it is? Don’t you see how men and animals are forced to serve
her; how well she gets through the world barefooted? She must not hear
of her power from us; that power lies in her heart, because she is
a sweet and innocent child! If she cannot get to the Snow Queen by
herself, and rid little Kay of the glass, we cannot help her. Two miles
hence the garden of the Snow Queen begins; thither you may carry the
little girl. Set her down by the large bush with red berries, standing
in the snow; don’t stay talking, but hasten back as fast as possible.”
 And now the Finland woman placed little Gerda on the Reindeer’s back,
and off he ran with all imaginable speed.
“Oh! I have not got my boots! I have not brought my gloves!” cried
little Gerda. She remarked she was without them from the cutting frost;
but the Reindeer dared not stand still; on he ran till he came to the
great bush with the red berries, and there he set Gerda down, kissed her
mouth, while large bright tears flowed from the animal’s eyes, and then
back he went as fast as possible. There stood poor Gerda now, without
shoes or gloves, in the very middle of dreadful icy Finland.
She ran on as fast as she could. There then came a whole regiment of
snow-flakes, but they did not fall from above, and they were quite
bright and shining from the Aurora Borealis. The flakes ran along
the ground, and the nearer they came the larger they grew. Gerda well
remembered how large and strange the snow-flakes appeared when she
once saw them through a magnifying-glass; but now they were large and
terrific in another manner--they were all alive. They were the outposts
of the Snow Queen. They had the most wondrous shapes; some looked like
large ugly porcupines; others like snakes knotted together, with their
heads sticking out; and others, again, like small fat bears, with the
hair standing on end: all were of dazzling whiteness--all were living
snow-flakes.
Little Gerda repeated the Lord’s Prayer. The cold was so intense that
she could see her own breath, which came like smoke out of her mouth. It
grew thicker and thicker, and took the form of little angels, that grew
more and more when they touched the earth. All had helms on their heads,
and lances and shields in their hands; they increased in numbers; and
when Gerda had finished the Lord’s Prayer, she was surrounded by a whole
legion. They thrust at the horrid snow-flakes with their spears, so that
they flew into a thousand pieces; and little Gerda walked on bravely and
in security. The angels patted her hands and feet; and then she felt the
cold less, and went on quickly towards the palace of the Snow Queen.
But now we shall see how Kay fared. He never thought of Gerda, and least
of all that she was standing before the palace.
SEVENTH STORY. What Took Place in the Palace of the Snow Queen, and what
Happened Afterward.
The walls of the palace were of driving snow, and the windows and doors
of cutting winds. There were more than a hundred halls there, according
as the snow was driven by the winds. The largest was many miles in
extent; all were lighted up by the powerful Aurora Borealis, and all
were so large, so empty, so icy cold, and so resplendent! Mirth never
reigned there; there was never even a little bear-ball, with the storm
for music, while the polar bears went on their hind legs and showed off
their steps. Never a little tea-party of white young lady foxes; vast,
cold, and empty were the halls of the Snow Queen. The northern-lights
shone with such precision that one could tell exactly when they were
at their highest or lowest degree of brightness. In the middle of the
empty, endless hall of snow, was a frozen lake; it was cracked in a
thousand pieces, but each piece was so like the other, that it seemed
the work of a cunning artificer. In the middle of this lake sat the Snow
Queen when she was at home; and then she said she was sitting in the
Mirror of Understanding, and that this was the only one and the best
thing in the world.
Little Kay was quite blue, yes nearly black with cold; but he did not
observe it, for she had kissed away all feeling of cold from his body,
and his heart was a lump of ice. He was dragging along some pointed
flat pieces of ice, which he laid together in all possible ways, for he
wanted to make something with them; just as we have little flat pieces
of wood to make geometrical figures with, called the Chinese Puzzle.
Kay made all sorts of figures, the most complicated, for it was
an ice-puzzle for the understanding. In his eyes the figures were
extraordinarily beautiful, and of the utmost importance; for the bit
of glass which was in his eye caused this. He found whole figures which
represented a written word; but he never could manage to represent just
the word he wanted--that word was “eternity”; and the Snow Queen had
said, “If you can discover that figure, you shall be your own master,
and I will make you a present of the whole world and a pair of new
skates.” But he could not find it out.
“I am going now to warm lands,” said the Snow Queen. “I must have a look
down into the black caldrons.” It was the volcanoes Vesuvius and Etna
that she meant. “I will just give them a coating of white, for that is
as it ought to be; besides, it is good for the oranges and the grapes.”
 And then away she flew, and Kay sat quite alone in the empty halls of
ice that were miles long, and looked at the blocks of ice, and thought
and thought till his skull was almost cracked. There he sat quite
benumbed and motionless; one would have imagined he was frozen to death.
Suddenly little Gerda stepped through the great portal into the palace.
The gate was formed of cutting winds; but Gerda repeated her evening
prayer, and the winds were laid as though they slept; and the little
maiden entered the vast, empty, cold halls. There she beheld Kay: she
recognised him, flew to embrace him, and cried out, her arms firmly
holding him the while, “Kay, sweet little Kay! Have I then found you at
last?”
But he sat quite still, benumbed and cold. Then little Gerda shed
burning tears; and they fell on his bosom, they penetrated to his
heart, they thawed the lumps of ice, and consumed the splinters of the
looking-glass; he looked at her, and she sang the hymn:
“The rose in the valley is blooming so sweet, And angels descend there
the children to greet.”
Hereupon Kay burst into tears; he wept so much that the splinter rolled
out of his eye, and he recognised her, and shouted, “Gerda, sweet little
Gerda! Where have you been so long? And where have I been?” He looked
round him. “How cold it is here!” said he. “How empty and cold!” And he
held fast by Gerda, who laughed and wept for joy. It was so beautiful,
that even the blocks of ice danced about for joy; and when they were
tired and laid themselves down, they formed exactly the letters which
the Snow Queen had told him to find out; so now he was his own master,
and he would have the whole world and a pair of new skates into the
Gerda kissed his cheeks, and they grew quite blooming; she kissed his
eyes, and they shone like her own; she kissed his hands and feet, and he
was again well and merry. The Snow Queen might come back as soon as she
liked; there stood his discharge written in resplendent masses of ice.
They took each other by the hand, and wandered forth out of the large
hall; they talked of their old grandmother, and of the roses upon the
roof; and wherever they went, the winds ceased raging, and the sun burst
forth. And when they reached the bush with the red berries, they found
the Reindeer waiting for them. He had brought another, a young one, with
him, whose udder was filled with milk, which he gave to the little ones,
and kissed their lips. They then carried Kay and Gerda--first to the
Finland woman, where they warmed themselves in the warm room, and
learned what they were to do on their journey home; and they went to
the Lapland woman, who made some new clothes for them and repaired their
sledges.
The Reindeer and the young hind leaped along beside them, and
accompanied them to the boundary of the country. Here the first
vegetation peeped forth; here Kay and Gerda took leave of the Lapland
woman. “Farewell! Farewell!” they all said. And the first green buds
appeared, the first little birds began to chirrup; and out of the wood
came, riding on a magnificent horse, which Gerda knew (it was one of the
leaders in the golden carriage), a young damsel with a bright-red cap on
her head, and armed with pistols. It was the little robber maiden, who,
tired of being at home, had determined to make a journey to the north;
and afterwards in another direction, if that did not please her. She
recognised Gerda immediately, and Gerda knew her too. It was a joyful
meeting.
“You are a fine fellow for tramping about,” said she to little Kay; “I
should like to know, faith, if you deserve that one should run from one
end of the world to the other for your sake?”
But Gerda patted her cheeks, and inquired for the Prince and Princess.
“They are gone abroad,” said the other.
“But the Raven?” asked little Gerda.
“Oh! The Raven is dead,” she answered. “His tame sweetheart is a
widow, and wears a bit of black worsted round her leg; she laments most
piteously, but it’s all mere talk and stuff! Now tell me what you’ve
been doing and how you managed to catch him.”
And Gerda and Kay both told their story.
And “Schnipp-schnapp-schnurre-basselurre,” said the robber maiden; and
she took the hands of each, and promised that if she should some day
pass through the town where they lived, she would come and visit them;
and then away she rode. Kay and Gerda took each other’s hand: it was
lovely spring weather, with abundance of flowers and of verdure. The
church-bells rang, and the children recognised the high towers, and the
large town; it was that in which they dwelt. They entered and hastened
up to their grandmother’s room, where everything was standing as
formerly. The clock said “tick! tack!” and the finger moved round; but
as they entered, they remarked that they were now grown up. The roses
on the leads hung blooming in at the open window; there stood the little
children’s chairs, and Kay and Gerda sat down on them, holding each
other by the hand; they both had forgotten the cold empty splendor of
the Snow Queen, as though it had been a dream. The grandmother sat in
the bright sunshine, and read aloud from the Bible: “Unless ye become as
little children, ye cannot enter the kingdom of heaven.”
And Kay and Gerda looked in each other’s eyes, and all at once they
understood the old hymn:
There sat the two grown-up persons; grown-up, and yet children; children
at least in heart; and it was summer-time; summer, glorious summer!
THE LEAP-FROG
A Flea, a Grasshopper, and a Leap-frog once wanted to see which could
jump highest; and they invited the whole world, and everybody else
besides who chose to come to see the festival. Three famous jumpers were
they, as everyone would say, when they all met together in the room.
“I will give my daughter to him who jumps highest,” exclaimed the King;
“for it is not so amusing where there is no prize to jump for.”
The Flea was the first to step forward. He had exquisite manners, and
bowed to the company on all sides; for he had noble blood, and was,
moreover, accustomed to the society of man alone; and that makes a great
difference.
Then came the Grasshopper. He was considerably heavier, but he was
well-mannered, and wore a green uniform, which he had by right of birth;
he said, moreover, that he belonged to a very ancient Egyptian family,
and that in the house where he then was, he was thought much of. The
fact was, he had been just brought out of the fields, and put in a
pasteboard house, three stories high, all made of court-cards, with the
colored side inwards; and doors and windows cut out of the body of
the Queen of Hearts. “I sing so well,” said he, “that sixteen native
grasshoppers who have chirped from infancy, and yet got no house built
of cards to live in, grew thinner than they were before for sheer
vexation when they heard me.”
It was thus that the Flea and the Grasshopper gave an account of
themselves, and thought they were quite good enough to marry a Princess.
The Leap-frog said nothing; but people gave it as their opinion, that
he therefore thought the more; and when the housedog snuffed at him
with his nose, he confessed the Leap-frog was of good family. The old
councillor, who had had three orders given him to make him hold his
tongue, asserted that the Leap-frog was a prophet; for that one could
see on his back, if there would be a severe or mild winter, and that
was what one could not see even on the back of the man who writes the
almanac.
“I say nothing, it is true,” exclaimed the King; “but I have my own
opinion, notwithstanding.”
Now the trial was to take place. The Flea jumped so high that nobody
could see where he went to; so they all asserted he had not jumped at
all; and that was dishonorable.
The Grasshopper jumped only half as high; but he leaped into the King’s
face, who said that was ill-mannered.
The Leap-frog stood still for a long time lost in thought; it was
believed at last he would not jump at all.
“I only hope he is not unwell,” said the house-dog; when, pop! he made a
jump all on one side into the lap of the Princess, who was sitting on a
little golden stool close by.
Hereupon the King said, “There is nothing above my daughter; therefore
to bound up to her is the highest jump that can be made; but for this,
one must possess understanding, and the Leap-frog has shown that he has
understanding. He is brave and intellectual.”
And so he won the Princess.
“It’s all the same to me,” said the Flea. “She may have the old
Leap-frog, for all I care. I jumped the highest; but in this world
merit seldom meets its reward. A fine exterior is what people look at
now-a-days.”
The Flea then went into foreign service, where, it is said, he was
killed.
The Grasshopper sat without on a green bank, and reflected on worldly
things; and he said too, “Yes, a fine exterior is everything--a fine
exterior is what people care about.” And then he began chirping his
peculiar melancholy song, from which we have taken this history; and
which may, very possibly, be all untrue, although it does stand here
printed in black and white.
THE ELDERBUSH
Once upon a time there was a little boy who had taken cold. He had
gone out and got his feet wet; though nobody could imagine how it had
happened, for it was quite dry weather. So his mother undressed him, put
him to bed, and had the tea-pot brought in, to make him a good cup of
Elderflower tea. Just at that moment the merry old man came in who
lived up a-top of the house all alone; for he had neither wife nor
children--but he liked children very much, and knew so many fairy tales,
that it was quite delightful.
“Now drink your tea,” said the boy’s mother; “then, perhaps, you may
hear a fairy tale.”
“If I had but something new to tell,” said the old man. “But how did the
child get his feet wet?”
“That is the very thing that nobody can make out,” said his mother.
“Am I to hear a fairy tale?” asked the little boy.
“Yes, if you can tell me exactly--for I must know that first--how deep
the gutter is in the little street opposite, that you pass through in
going to school.”
“Just up to the middle of my boot,” said the child; “but then I must go
into the deep hole.”
“Ah, ah! That’s where the wet feet came from,” said the old man. “I
ought now to tell you a story; but I don’t know any more.”
“You can make one in a moment,” said the little boy. “My mother says
that all you look at can be turned into a fairy tale: and that you can
find a story in everything.”
“Yes, but such tales and stories are good for nothing. The right sort
come of themselves; they tap at my forehead and say, ‘Here we are.’”
“Won’t there be a tap soon?” asked the little boy. And his mother
laughed, put some Elder-flowers in the tea-pot, and poured boiling water
upon them.
“Do tell me something! Pray do!”
“Yes, if a fairy tale would come of its own accord; but they are proud
and haughty, and come only when they choose. Stop!” said he, all on a
sudden. “I have it! Pay attention! There is one in the tea-pot!”
And the little boy looked at the tea-pot. The cover rose more and more;
and the Elder-flowers came forth so fresh and white, and shot up long
branches. Out of the spout even did they spread themselves on all sides,
and grew larger and larger; it was a splendid Elderbush, a whole tree;
and it reached into the very bed, and pushed the curtains aside. How
it bloomed! And what an odour! In the middle of the bush sat a
friendly-looking old woman in a most strange dress. It was quite
green, like the leaves of the elder, and was trimmed with large white
Elder-flowers; so that at first one could not tell whether it was a
stuff, or a natural green and real flowers.
“What’s that woman’s name?” asked the little boy.
“The Greeks and Romans,” said the old man, “called her a Dryad; but that
we do not understand. The people who live in the New Booths have a much
better name for her; they call her ‘old Granny’--and she it is to
whom you are to pay attention. Now listen, and look at the beautiful
Elderbush.
     * A row of buildings for seamen in Copenhagen.
“Just such another large blooming Elder Tree stands near the New Booths.
It grew there in the corner of a little miserable court-yard; and under
it sat, of an afternoon, in the most splendid sunshine, two old
people; an old, old seaman, and his old, old wife. They had
great-grand-children, and were soon to celebrate the fiftieth
anniversary of their marriage; but they could not exactly recollect the
date: and old Granny sat in the tree, and looked as pleased as now. ‘I
know the date,’ said she; but those below did not hear her, for they
were talking about old times.
“‘Yes, can’t you remember when we were very little,’ said the old
seaman, ‘and ran and played about? It was the very same court-yard where
we now are, and we stuck slips in the ground, and made a garden.’
“‘I remember it well,’ said the old woman; ‘I remember it quite well. We
watered the slips, and one of them was an Elderbush. It took root, put
forth green shoots, and grew up to be the large tree under which we old
folks are now sitting.’
“‘To be sure,’ said he. ‘And there in the corner stood a waterpail,
where I used to swim my boats.’
“‘True; but first we went to school to learn somewhat,’ said she; ‘and
then we were confirmed. We both cried; but in the afternoon we went up
the Round Tower, and looked down on Copenhagen, and far, far away over
the water; then we went to Friedericksberg, where the King and the Queen
were sailing about in their splendid barges.’
“‘But I had a different sort of sailing to that, later; and that, too,
for many a year; a long way off, on great voyages.’
“‘Yes, many a time have I wept for your sake,’ said she. ‘I thought you
were dead and gone, and lying down in the deep waters. Many a night have
I got up to see if the wind had not changed: and changed it had, sure
enough; but you never came. I remember so well one day, when the rain
was pouring down in torrents, the scavengers were before the house where
I was in service, and I had come up with the dust, and remained standing
at the door--it was dreadful weather--when just as I was there, the
postman came and gave me a letter. It was from you! What a tour that
letter had made! I opened it instantly and read: I laughed and wept.
I was so happy. In it I read that you were in warm lands where the
coffee-tree grows. What a blessed land that must be! You related so
much, and I saw it all the while the rain was pouring down, and I
standing there with the dust-box. At the same moment came someone who
embraced me.’
“‘Yes; but you gave him a good box on his ear that made it tingle!’
“‘But I did not know it was you. You arrived as soon as your letter,
and you were so handsome--that you still are--and had a long yellow silk
handkerchief round your neck, and a bran new hat on; oh, you were so
dashing! Good heavens! What weather it was, and what a state the street
was in!’
“‘And then we married,’ said he. ‘Don’t you remember? And then we
had our first little boy, and then Mary, and Nicholas, and Peter, and
Christian.’
“‘Yes, and how they all grew up to be honest people, and were beloved by
everybody.’
“‘And their children also have children,’ said the old sailor; ‘yes,
those are our grand-children, full of strength and vigor. It was,
methinks about this season that we had our wedding.’
“‘Yes, this very day is the fiftieth anniversary of the marriage,’ said
old Granny, sticking her head between the two old people; who thought
it was their neighbor who nodded to them. They looked at each other and
held one another by the hand. Soon after came their children, and their
grand-children; for they knew well enough that it was the day of the
fiftieth anniversary, and had come with their gratulations that very
morning; but the old people had forgotten it, although they were able
to remember all that had happened many years ago. And the Elderbush sent
forth a strong odour in the sun, that was just about to set, and shone
right in the old people’s faces. They both looked so rosy-cheeked; and
the youngest of the grandchildren danced around them, and called out
quite delighted, that there was to be something very splendid that
evening--they were all to have hot potatoes. And old Nanny nodded in the
bush, and shouted ‘hurrah!’ with the rest.”
“But that is no fairy tale,” said the little boy, who was listening to
the story.
“The thing is, you must understand it,” said the narrator; “let us ask
old Nanny.”
“That was no fairy tale, ‘tis true,” said old Nanny; “but now it’s
coming. The most wonderful fairy tales grow out of that which is
reality; were that not the case, you know, my magnificent Elderbush
could not have grown out of the tea-pot.” And then she took the little
boy out of bed, laid him on her bosom, and the branches of the Elder
Tree, full of flowers, closed around her. They sat in an aerial
dwelling, and it flew with them through the air. Oh, it was wondrous
beautiful! Old Nanny had grown all of a sudden a young and pretty
maiden; but her robe was still the same green stuff with white flowers,
which she had worn before. On her bosom she had a real Elderflower,
and in her yellow waving hair a wreath of the flowers; her eyes were so
large and blue that it was a pleasure to look at them; she kissed the
boy, and now they were of the same age and felt alike.
Hand in hand they went out of the bower, and they were standing in the
beautiful garden of their home. Near the green lawn papa’s walking-stick
was tied, and for the little ones it seemed to be endowed with life; for
as soon as they got astride it, the round polished knob was turned into
a magnificent neighing head, a long black mane fluttered in the breeze,
and four slender yet strong legs shot out. The animal was strong and
handsome, and away they went at full gallop round the lawn.
“Huzza! Now we are riding miles off,” said the boy. “We are riding away
to the castle where we were last year!”
And on they rode round the grass-plot; and the little maiden, who, we
know, was no one else but old Nanny, kept on crying out, “Now we are in
the country! Don’t you see the farm-house yonder? And there is an Elder
Tree standing beside it; and the cock is scraping away the earth for the
hens, look, how he struts! And now we are close to the church. It lies
high upon the hill, between the large oak-trees, one of which is half
decayed. And now we are by the smithy, where the fire is blazing, and
where the half-naked men are banging with their hammers till the sparks
fly about. Away! away! To the beautiful country-seat!”
And all that the little maiden, who sat behind on the stick, spoke of,
flew by in reality. The boy saw it all, and yet they were only going
round the grass-plot. Then they played in a side avenue, and marked out
a little garden on the earth; and they took Elder-blossoms from their
hair, planted them, and they grew just like those the old people planted
when they were children, as related before. They went hand in hand, as
the old people had done when they were children; but not to the Round
Tower, or to Friedericksberg; no, the little damsel wound her arms round
the boy, and then they flew far away through all Denmark. And spring
came, and summer; and then it was autumn, and then winter; and a
thousand pictures were reflected in the eye and in the heart of the boy;
and the little girl always sang to him, “This you will never forget.”
 And during their whole flight the Elder Tree smelt so sweet and odorous;
he remarked the roses and the fresh beeches, but the Elder Tree had
a more wondrous fragrance, for its flowers hung on the breast of the
little maiden; and there, too, did he often lay his head during the
flight.
“It is lovely here in spring!” said the young maiden. And they stood in
a beech-wood that had just put on its first green, where the woodroof [*]
at their feet sent forth its fragrance, and the pale-red anemony looked
so pretty among the verdure. “Oh, would it were always spring in the
sweetly-smelling Danish beech-forests!”
     * Asperula odorata.
“It is lovely here in summer!” said she. And she flew past old castles
of by-gone days of chivalry, where the red walls and the embattled
gables were mirrored in the canal, where the swans were swimming, and
peered up into the old cool avenues. In the fields the corn was waving
like the sea; in the ditches red and yellow flowers were growing; while
wild-drone flowers, and blooming convolvuluses were creeping in the
hedges; and towards evening the moon rose round and large, and the
haycocks in the meadows smelt so sweetly. “This one never forgets!”
“It is lovely here in autumn!” said the little maiden. And suddenly the
atmosphere grew as blue again as before; the forest grew red, and green,
and yellow-colored. The dogs came leaping along, and whole flocks of
wild-fowl flew over the cairn, where blackberry-bushes were hanging
round the old stones. The sea was dark blue, covered with ships full
of white sails; and in the barn old women, maidens, and children were
sitting picking hops into a large cask; the young sang songs, but the
old told fairy tales of mountain-sprites and soothsayers. Nothing could
be more charming.
“It is delightful here in winter!” said the little maiden. And all the
trees were covered with hoar-frost; they looked like white corals; the
snow crackled under foot, as if one had new boots on; and one falling
star after the other was seen in the sky. The Christmas-tree was lighted
in the room; presents were there, and good-humor reigned. In the country
the violin sounded in the room of the peasant; the newly-baked cakes
were attacked; even the poorest child said, “It is really delightful
here in winter!”
Yes, it was delightful; and the little maiden showed the boy everything;
and the Elder Tree still was fragrant, and the red flag, with the white
cross, was still waving: the flag under which the old seaman in the New
Booths had sailed. And the boy grew up to be a lad, and was to go forth
in the wide world-far, far away to warm lands, where the coffee-tree
grows; but at his departure the little maiden took an Elder-blossom from
her bosom, and gave it him to keep; and it was placed between the leaves
of his Prayer-Book; and when in foreign lands he opened the book, it
was always at the place where the keepsake-flower lay; and the more he
looked at it, the fresher it became; he felt as it were, the fragrance
of the Danish groves; and from among the leaves of the flowers he could
distinctly see the little maiden, peeping forth with her bright blue
eyes--and then she whispered, “It is delightful here in Spring, Summer,
Autumn, and Winter”; and a hundred visions glided before his mind.
Thus passed many years, and he was now an old man, and sat with his old
wife under the blooming tree. They held each other by the hand, as the
old grand-father and grand-mother yonder in the New Booths did, and they
talked exactly like them of old times, and of the fiftieth anniversary
of their wedding. The little maiden, with the blue eyes, and with
Elder-blossoms in her hair, sat in the tree, nodded to both of them,
and said, “To-day is the fiftieth anniversary!” And then she took two
flowers out of her hair, and kissed them. First, they shone like silver,
then like gold; and when they laid them on the heads of the old people,
each flower became a golden crown. So there they both sat, like a king
and a queen, under the fragrant tree, that looked exactly like an elder:
the old man told his wife the story of “Old Nanny,” as it had been told
him when a boy. And it seemed to both of them it contained much that
resembled their own history; and those parts that were like it pleased
them best.
“Thus it is,” said the little maiden in the tree, “some call me ‘Old
Nanny,’ others a ‘Dryad,’ but, in reality, my name is ‘Remembrance’;
‘tis I who sit in the tree that grows and grows! I can remember; I can
tell things! Let me see if you have my flower still?”
And the old man opened his Prayer-Book. There lay the Elder-blossom,
as fresh as if it had been placed there but a short time before; and
Remembrance nodded, and the old people, decked with crowns of gold, sat
in the flush of the evening sun. They closed their eyes, and--and--!
Yes, that’s the end of the story!
The little boy lay in his bed; he did not know if he had dreamed or
not, or if he had been listening while someone told him the story. The
tea-pot was standing on the table, but no Elder Tree was growing out
of it! And the old man, who had been talking, was just on the point of
going out at the door, and he did go.
“How splendid that was!” said the little boy. “Mother, I have been to
warm countries.”
“So I should think,” said his mother. “When one has drunk two good
cupfuls of Elder-flower tea, ‘tis likely enough one goes into warm
climates”; and she tucked him up nicely, least he should take cold. “You
have had a good sleep while I have been sitting here, and arguing with
him whether it was a story or a fairy tale.”
“And where is old Nanny?” asked the little boy.
“In the tea-pot,” said his mother; “and there she may remain.”
THE BELL
People said “The Evening Bell is sounding, the sun is setting.” For a
strange wondrous tone was heard in the narrow streets of a large town.
It was like the sound of a church-bell: but it was only heard for a
moment, for the rolling of the carriages and the voices of the multitude
made too great a noise.
Those persons who were walking outside the town, where the houses were
farther apart, with gardens or little fields between them, could see
the evening sky still better, and heard the sound of the bell much
more distinctly. It was as if the tones came from a church in the still
forest; people looked thitherward, and felt their minds attuned most
solemnly.
A long time passed, and people said to each other--“I wonder if there
is a church out in the wood? The bell has a tone that is wondrous sweet;
let us stroll thither, and examine the matter nearer.” And the rich
people drove out, and the poor walked, but the way seemed strangely
long to them; and when they came to a clump of willows which grew on the
skirts of the forest, they sat down, and looked up at the long
branches, and fancied they were now in the depth of the green wood. The
confectioner of the town came out, and set up his booth there; and soon
after came another confectioner, who hung a bell over his stand, as
a sign or ornament, but it had no clapper, and it was tarred over to
preserve it from the rain. When all the people returned home, they said
it had been very romantic, and that it was quite a different sort of
thing to a pic-nic or tea-party. There were three persons who asserted
they had penetrated to the end of the forest, and that they had always
heard the wonderful sounds of the bell, but it had seemed to them as if
it had come from the town. One wrote a whole poem about it, and said the
bell sounded like the voice of a mother to a good dear child, and
that no melody was sweeter than the tones of the bell. The king of the
country was also observant of it, and vowed that he who could discover
whence the sounds proceeded, should have the title of “Universal
Bell-ringer,” even if it were not really a bell.
Many persons now went to the wood, for the sake of getting the place,
but one only returned with a sort of explanation; for nobody went far
enough, that one not further than the others. However, he said that
the sound proceeded from a very large owl, in a hollow tree; a sort of
learned owl, that continually knocked its head against the branches. But
whether the sound came from his head or from the hollow tree, that no
one could say with certainty. So now he got the place of “Universal
Bell-ringer,” and wrote yearly a short treatise “On the Owl”; but
everybody was just as wise as before.
It was the day of confirmation. The clergyman had spoken so touchingly,
the children who were confirmed had been greatly moved; it was
an eventful day for them; from children they become all at once
grown-up-persons; it was as if their infant souls were now to fly all
at once into persons with more understanding. The sun was shining
gloriously; the children that had been confirmed went out of the town;
and from the wood was borne towards them the sounds of the unknown bell
with wonderful distinctness. They all immediately felt a wish to go
thither; all except three. One of them had to go home to try on a
ball-dress; for it was just the dress and the ball which had caused her
to be confirmed this time, for otherwise she would not have come;
the other was a poor boy, who had borrowed his coat and boots to be
confirmed in from the innkeeper’s son, and he was to give them back by
a certain hour; the third said that he never went to a strange place
if his parents were not with him--that he had always been a good boy
hitherto, and would still be so now that he was confirmed, and that one
ought not to laugh at him for it: the others, however, did make fun of
him, after all.
There were three, therefore, that did not go; the others hastened on.
The sun shone, the birds sang, and the children sang too, and each held
the other by the hand; for as yet they had none of them any high office,
and were all of equal rank in the eye of God.
But two of the youngest soon grew tired, and both returned to town; two
little girls sat down, and twined garlands, so they did not go either;
and when the others reached the willow-tree, where the confectioner was,
they said, “Now we are there! In reality the bell does not exist; it is
only a fancy that people have taken into their heads!”
At the same moment the bell sounded deep in the wood, so clear and
solemnly that five or six determined to penetrate somewhat further. It
was so thick, and the foliage so dense, that it was quite fatiguing
to proceed. Woodroof and anemonies grew almost too high; blooming
convolvuluses and blackberry-bushes hung in long garlands from tree to
tree, where the nightingale sang and the sunbeams were playing: it was
very beautiful, but it was no place for girls to go; their clothes would
get so torn. Large blocks of stone lay there, overgrown with moss of
every color; the fresh spring bubbled forth, and made a strange gurgling
sound.
“That surely cannot be the bell,” said one of the children, lying down
and listening. “This must be looked to.” So he remained, and let the
others go on without him.
They afterwards came to a little house, made of branches and the bark of
trees; a large wild apple-tree bent over it, as if it would shower down
all its blessings on the roof, where roses were blooming. The long stems
twined round the gable, on which there hung a small bell.
Was it that which people had heard? Yes, everybody was unanimous on the
subject, except one, who said that the bell was too small and too fine
to be heard at so great a distance, and besides it was very different
tones to those that could move a human heart in such a manner. It was a
king’s son who spoke; whereon the others said, “Such people always want
to be wiser than everybody else.”
They now let him go on alone; and as he went, his breast was filled more
and more with the forest solitude; but he still heard the little bell
with which the others were so satisfied, and now and then, when the
wind blew, he could also hear the people singing who were sitting at tea
where the confectioner had his tent; but the deep sound of the bell rose
louder; it was almost as if an organ were accompanying it, and the tones
came from the left hand, the side where the heart is placed. A rustling
was heard in the bushes, and a little boy stood before the King’s Son, a
boy in wooden shoes, and with so short a jacket that one could see what
long wrists he had. Both knew each other: the boy was that one among
the children who could not come because he had to go home and return his
jacket and boots to the innkeeper’s son. This he had done, and was now
going on in wooden shoes and in his humble dress, for the bell sounded
with so deep a tone, and with such strange power, that proceed he must.
“Why, then, we can go together,” said the King’s Son. But the poor
child that had been confirmed was quite ashamed; he looked at his wooden
shoes, pulled at the short sleeves of his jacket, and said that he was
afraid he could not walk so fast; besides, he thought that the bell must
be looked for to the right; for that was the place where all sorts of
beautiful things were to be found.
“But there we shall not meet,” said the King’s Son, nodding at the same
time to the poor boy, who went into the darkest, thickest part of the
wood, where thorns tore his humble dress, and scratched his face and
hands and feet till they bled. The King’s Son got some scratches too;
but the sun shone on his path, and it is him that we will follow, for he
was an excellent and resolute youth.
“I must and will find the bell,” said he, “even if I am obliged to go to
the end of the world.”
The ugly apes sat upon the trees, and grinned. “Shall we thrash him?”
 said they. “Shall we thrash him? He is the son of a king!”
But on he went, without being disheartened, deeper and deeper into the
wood, where the most wonderful flowers were growing. There stood white
lilies with blood-red stamina, skyblue tulips, which shone as they waved
in the winds, and apple-trees, the apples of which looked exactly like
large soapbubbles: so only think how the trees must have sparkled in the
sunshine! Around the nicest green meads, where the deer were playing in
the grass, grew magnificent oaks and beeches; and if the bark of one of
the trees was cracked, there grass and long creeping plants grew in
the crevices. And there were large calm lakes there too, in which white
swans were swimming, and beat the air with their wings. The King’s Son
often stood still and listened. He thought the bell sounded from the
depths of these still lakes; but then he remarked again that the tone
proceeded not from there, but farther off, from out the depths of the
forest.
The sun now set: the atmosphere glowed like fire. It was still in the
woods, so very still; and he fell on his knees, sung his evening hymn,
and said: “I cannot find what I seek; the sun is going down, and night
is coming--the dark, dark night. Yet perhaps I may be able once more
to see the round red sun before he entirely disappears. I will climb up
yonder rock.”
And he seized hold of the creeping-plants, and the roots of
trees--climbed up the moist stones where the water-snakes were writhing
and the toads were croaking--and he gained the summit before the sun
had quite gone down. How magnificent was the sight from this height! The
sea--the great, the glorious sea, that dashed its long waves against the
coast--was stretched out before him. And yonder, where sea and sky meet,
stood the sun, like a large shining altar, all melted together in the
most glowing colors. And the wood and the sea sang a song of rejoicing,
and his heart sang with the rest: all nature was a vast holy church,
in which the trees and the buoyant clouds were the pillars, flowers and
grass the velvet carpeting, and heaven itself the large cupola. The red
colors above faded away as the sun vanished, but a million stars were
lighted, a million lamps shone; and the King’s Son spread out his arms
towards heaven, and wood, and sea; when at the same moment, coming by
a path to the right, appeared, in his wooden shoes and jacket, the poor
boy who had been confirmed with him. He had followed his own path, and
had reached the spot just as soon as the son of the king had done. They
ran towards each other, and stood together hand in hand in the vast
church of nature and of poetry, while over them sounded the invisible
holy bell: blessed spirits floated around them, and lifted up their
voices in a rejoicing hallelujah!
THE OLD HOUSE
In the street, up there, was an old, a very old house--it was almost
three hundred years old, for that might be known by reading the great
beam on which the date of the year was carved: together with tulips and
hop-binds there were whole verses spelled as in former times, and over
every window was a distorted face cut out in the beam. The one story
stood forward a great way over the other; and directly under the eaves
was a leaden spout with a dragon’s head; the rain-water should have run
out of the mouth, but it ran out of the belly, for there was a hole in
the spout.
All the other houses in the street were so new and so neat, with large
window panes and smooth walls, one could easily see that they would have
nothing to do with the old house: they certainly thought, “How long is
that old decayed thing to stand here as a spectacle in the street? And
then the projecting windows stand so far out, that no one can see from
our windows what happens in that direction! The steps are as broad as
those of a palace, and as high as to a church tower. The iron railings
look just like the door to an old family vault, and then they have brass
tops--that’s so stupid!”
On the other side of the street were also new and neat houses, and they
thought just as the others did; but at the window opposite the old house
there sat a little boy with fresh rosy cheeks and bright beaming eyes:
he certainly liked the old house best, and that both in sunshine and
moonshine. And when he looked across at the wall where the mortar
had fallen out, he could sit and find out there the strangest figures
imaginable; exactly as the street had appeared before, with steps,
projecting windows, and pointed gables; he could see soldiers with
halberds, and spouts where the water ran, like dragons and serpents.
That was a house to look at; and there lived an old man, who wore plush
breeches; and he had a coat with large brass buttons, and a wig that one
could see was a real wig. Every morning there came an old fellow to him
who put his rooms in order, and went on errands; otherwise, the old man
in the plush breeches was quite alone in the old house. Now and then he
came to the window and looked out, and the little boy nodded to him,
and the old man nodded again, and so they became acquaintances, and then
they were friends, although they had never spoken to each other--but
that made no difference. The little boy heard his parents say, “The old
man opposite is very well off, but he is so very, very lonely!”
The Sunday following, the little boy took something, and wrapped it up
in a piece of paper, went downstairs, and stood in the doorway; and when
the man who went on errands came past, he said to him--
“I say, master! will you give this to the old man over the way from me?
I have two pewter soldiers--this is one of them, and he shall have it,
for I know he is so very, very lonely.”
And the old errand man looked quite pleased, nodded, and took the pewter
soldier over to the old house. Afterwards there came a message; it was
to ask if the little boy himself had not a wish to come over and pay a
visit; and so he got permission of his parents, and then went over to
the old house.
And the brass balls on the iron railings shone much brighter than ever;
one would have thought they were polished on account of the visit; and
it was as if the carved-out trumpeters--for there were trumpeters, who
stood in tulips, carved out on the door--blew with all their
might, their cheeks appeared so much rounder than before. Yes, they
blew--“Trateratra! The little boy comes! Trateratra!”--and then the door
opened.
The whole passage was hung with portraits of knights in armor, and
ladies in silken gowns; and the armor rattled, and the silken gowns
rustled! And then there was a flight of stairs which went a good way
upwards, and a little way downwards, and then one came on a balcony
which was in a very dilapidated state, sure enough, with large holes and
long crevices, but grass grew there and leaves out of them altogether,
for the whole balcony outside, the yard, and the walls, were overgrown
with so much green stuff, that it looked like a garden; only a balcony.
Here stood old flower-pots with faces and asses’ ears, and the flowers
grew just as they liked. One of the pots was quite overrun on all sides
with pinks, that is to say, with the green part; shoot stood by shoot,
and it said quite distinctly, “The air has cherished me, the sun has
kissed me, and promised me a little flower on Sunday! a little flower on
Sunday!”
And then they entered a chamber where the walls were covered with hog’s
leather, and printed with gold flowers.
   “The gilding decays,
   But hog’s leather stays!”
said the walls.
And there stood easy-chairs, with such high backs, and so carved out,
and with arms on both sides. “Sit down! sit down!” said they. “Ugh! how
I creak; now I shall certainly get the gout, like the old clothespress,
ugh!”
And then the little boy came into the room where the projecting windows
were, and where the old man sat.
“I thank you for the pewter soldier, my little friend!” said the old
man. “And I thank you because you come over to me.”
“Thankee! thankee!” or “cranky! cranky!” sounded from all the furniture;
there was so much of it, that each article stood in the other’s way, to
get a look at the little boy.
In the middle of the wall hung a picture representing a beautiful lady,
so young, so glad, but dressed quite as in former times, with clothes
that stood quite stiff, and with powder in her hair; she neither said
“thankee, thankee!” nor “cranky, cranky!” but looked with her mild eyes
at the little boy, who directly asked the old man, “Where did you get
her?”
“Yonder, at the broker’s,” said the old man, “where there are so many
pictures hanging. No one knows or cares about them, for they are all of
them buried; but I knew her in by-gone days, and now she has been dead
and gone these fifty years!”
Under the picture, in a glazed frame, there hung a bouquet of withered
flowers; they were almost fifty years old; they looked so very old!
The pendulum of the great clock went to and fro, and the hands turned,
and everything in the room became still older; but they did not observe
“They say at home,” said the little boy, “that you are so very, very
lonely!”
“Oh!” said he. “The old thoughts, with what they may bring with them,
come and visit me, and now you also come! I am very well off!”
Then he took a book with pictures in it down from the shelf; there were
whole long processions and pageants, with the strangest characters,
which one never sees now-a-days; soldiers like the knave of clubs,
and citizens with waving flags: the tailors had theirs, with a pair of
shears held by two lions--and the shoemakers theirs, without boots,
but with an eagle that had two heads, for the shoemakers must have
everything so that they can say, it is a pair! Yes, that was a picture
book!
The old man now went into the other room to fetch preserves, apples, and
nuts--yes, it was delightful over there in the old house.
“I cannot bear it any longer!” said the pewter soldier, who sat on the
drawers. “It is so lonely and melancholy here! But when one has been in
a family circle one cannot accustom oneself to this life! I cannot bear
it any longer! The whole day is so long, and the evenings are still
longer! Here it is not at all as it is over the way at your home, where
your father and mother spoke so pleasantly, and where you and all your
sweet children made such a delightful noise. Nay, how lonely the old man
is--do you think that he gets kisses? Do you think he gets mild eyes,
or a Christmas tree? He will get nothing but a grave! I can bear it no
longer!”
“You must not let it grieve you so much,” said the little boy. “I find
it so very delightful here, and then all the old thoughts, with what
they may bring with them, they come and visit here.”
“Yes, it’s all very well, but I see nothing of them, and I don’t know
them!” said the pewter soldier. “I cannot bear it!”
“But you must!” said the little boy.
Then in came the old man with the most pleased and happy face, the most
delicious preserves, apples, and nuts, and so the little boy thought no
more about the pewter soldier.
The little boy returned home happy and pleased, and weeks and days
passed away, and nods were made to the old house, and from the old
house, and then the little boy went over there again.
The carved trumpeters blew, “Trateratra! There is the little boy!
Trateratra!” and the swords and armor on the knights’ portraits rattled,
and the silk gowns rustled; the hog’s leather spoke, and the old chairs
had the gout in their legs and rheumatism in their backs: Ugh! it was
exactly like the first time, for over there one day and hour was just
like another.
“I cannot bear it!” said the pewter soldier. “I have shed pewter tears!
It is too melancholy! Rather let me go to the wars and lose arms and
legs! It would at least be a change. I cannot bear it longer! Now, I
know what it is to have a visit from one’s old thoughts, with what they
may bring with them! I have had a visit from mine, and you may be sure
it is no pleasant thing in the end; I was at last about to jump down
from the drawers.
“I saw you all over there at home so distinctly, as if you really were
here; it was again that Sunday morning; all you children stood before
the table and sung your Psalms, as you do every morning. You stood
devoutly with folded hands; and father and mother were just as pious;
and then the door was opened, and little sister Mary, who is not two
years old yet, and who always dances when she hears music or singing, of
whatever kind it may be, was put into the room--though she ought not to
have been there--and then she began to dance, but could not keep time,
because the tones were so long; and then she stood, first on the one
leg, and bent her head forwards, and then on the other leg, and bent
her head forwards--but all would not do. You stood very seriously all
together, although it was difficult enough; but I laughed to myself, and
then I fell off the table, and got a bump, which I have still--for it
was not right of me to laugh. But the whole now passes before me again
in thought, and everything that I have lived to see; and these are the
old thoughts, with what they may bring with them.
“Tell me if you still sing on Sundays? Tell me something about little
Mary! And how my comrade, the other pewter soldier, lives! Yes, he is
happy enough, that’s sure! I cannot bear it any longer!”
“You are given away as a present!” said the little boy. “You must
remain. Can you not understand that?”
The old man now came with a drawer, in which there was much to be seen,
both “tin boxes” and “balsam boxes,” old cards, so large and so gilded,
such as one never sees them now. And several drawers were opened, and
the piano was opened; it had landscapes on the inside of the lid, and it
was so hoarse when the old man played on it! and then he hummed a song.
“Yes, she could sing that!” said he, and nodded to the portrait, which
he had bought at the broker’s, and the old man’s eyes shone so bright!
“I will go to the wars! I will go to the wars!” shouted the pewter
soldier as loud as he could, and threw himself off the drawers right
down on the floor. What became of him? The old man sought, and the
little boy sought; he was away, and he stayed away.
“I shall find him!” said the old man; but he never found him. The floor
was too open--the pewter soldier had fallen through a crevice, and there
he lay as in an open tomb.
That day passed, and the little boy went home, and that week passed,
and several weeks too. The windows were quite frozen, the little boy was
obliged to sit and breathe on them to get a peep-hole over to the old
house, and there the snow had been blown into all the carved work and
inscriptions; it lay quite up over the steps, just as if there was no
one at home--nor was there any one at home--the old man was dead!
In the evening there was a hearse seen before the door, and he was borne
into it in his coffin: he was now to go out into the country, to lie in
his grave. He was driven out there, but no one followed; all his friends
were dead, and the little boy kissed his hand to the coffin as it was
driven away.
Some days afterwards there was an auction at the old house, and the
little boy saw from his window how they carried the old knights and the
old ladies away, the flower-pots with the long ears, the old chairs, and
the old clothes-presses. Something came here, and something came there;
the portrait of her who had been found at the broker’s came to the
broker’s again; and there it hung, for no one knew her more--no one
cared about the old picture.
In the spring they pulled the house down, for, as people said, it was
a ruin. One could see from the street right into the room with the
hog’s-leather hanging, which was slashed and torn; and the green grass
and leaves about the balcony hung quite wild about the falling beams.
And then it was put to rights.
“That was a relief,” said the neighboring houses.
A fine house was built there, with large windows, and smooth white
walls; but before it, where the old house had in fact stood, was a
little garden laid out, and a wild grapevine ran up the wall of the
neighboring house. Before the garden there was a large iron railing
with an iron door, it looked quite splendid, and people stood still and
peeped in, and the sparrows hung by scores in the vine, and chattered
away at each other as well as they could, but it was not about the old
house, for they could not remember it, so many years had passed--so many
that the little boy had grown up to a whole man, yes, a clever man, and
a pleasure to his parents; and he had just been married, and, together
with his little wife, had come to live in the house here, where the
garden was; and he stood by her there whilst she planted a field-flower
that she found so pretty; she planted it with her little hand, and
pressed the earth around it with her fingers. Oh! what was that? She
had stuck herself. There sat something pointed, straight out of the soft
mould.
It was--yes, guess! It was the pewter soldier, he that was lost up at
the old man’s, and had tumbled and turned about amongst the timber and
the rubbish, and had at last laid for many years in the ground.
The young wife wiped the dirt off the soldier, first with a green leaf,
and then with her fine handkerchief--it had such a delightful smell,
that it was to the pewter soldier just as if he had awaked from a
trance.
“Let me see him,” said the young man. He laughed, and then shook his
head. “Nay, it cannot be he; but he reminds me of a story about a pewter
soldier which I had when I was a little boy!” And then he told his wife
about the old house, and the old man, and about the pewter soldier that
he sent over to him because he was so very, very lonely; and he told it
as correctly as it had really been, so that the tears came into the eyes
of his young wife, on account of the old house and the old man.
“It may possibly be, however, that it is the same pewter soldier!” said
she. “I will take care of it, and remember all that you have told me;
but you must show me the old man’s grave!”
“But I do not know it,” said he, “and no one knows it! All his friends
were dead, no one took care of it, and I was then a little boy!”
“How very, very lonely he must have been!” said she.
“Very, very lonely!” said the pewter soldier. “But it is delightful not
to be forgotten!”
“Delightful!” shouted something close by; but no one, except the pewter
soldier, saw that it was a piece of the hog’s-leather hangings; it had
lost all its gilding, it looked like a piece of wet clay, but it had an
opinion, and it gave it:
This the pewter soldier did not believe.
THE HAPPY FAMILY
Really, the largest green leaf in this country is a dock-leaf; if one
holds it before one, it is like a whole apron, and if one holds it over
one’s head in rainy weather, it is almost as good as an umbrella, for
it is so immensely large. The burdock never grows alone, but where there
grows one there always grow several: it is a great delight, and all this
delightfulness is snails’ food. The great white snails which persons of
quality in former times made fricassees of, ate, and said, “Hem,
hem! how delicious!” for they thought it tasted so delicate--lived on
dock-leaves, and therefore burdock seeds were sown.
Now, there was an old manor-house, where they no longer ate snails, they
were quite extinct; but the burdocks were not extinct, they grew and
grew all over the walks and all the beds; they could not get the mastery
over them--it was a whole forest of burdocks. Here and there stood an
apple and a plum-tree, or else one never would have thought that it was
a garden; all was burdocks, and there lived the two last venerable old
snails.
They themselves knew not how old they were, but they could remember
very well that there had been many more; that they were of a family
from foreign lands, and that for them and theirs the whole forest was
planted. They had never been outside it, but they knew that there was
still something more in the world, which was called the manor-house, and
that there they were boiled, and then they became black, and were then
placed on a silver dish; but what happened further they knew not; or, in
fact, what it was to be boiled, and to lie on a silver dish, they could
not possibly imagine; but it was said to be delightful, and particularly
genteel. Neither the chafers, the toads, nor the earth-worms, whom they
asked about it could give them any information--none of them had been
boiled or laid on a silver dish.
The old white snails were the first persons of distinction in the
world, that they knew; the forest was planted for their sake, and the
manor-house was there that they might be boiled and laid on a silver
dish.
Now they lived a very lonely and happy life; and as they had no children
themselves, they had adopted a little common snail, which they brought
up as their own; but the little one would not grow, for he was of a
common family; but the old ones, especially Dame Mother Snail, thought
they could observe how he increased in size, and she begged father,
if he could not see it, that he would at least feel the little snail’s
shell; and then he felt it, and found the good dame was right.
One day there was a heavy storm of rain.
“Hear how it beats like a drum on the dock-leaves!” said Father Snail.
“There are also rain-drops!” said Mother Snail. “And now the rain pours
right down the stalk! You will see that it will be wet here! I am very
happy to think that we have our good house, and the little one has
his also! There is more done for us than for all other creatures, sure
enough; but can you not see that we are folks of quality in the world?
We are provided with a house from our birth, and the burdock forest is
planted for our sakes! I should like to know how far it extends, and
what there is outside!”
“There is nothing at all,” said Father Snail. “No place can be better
than ours, and I have nothing to wish for!”
“Yes,” said the dame. “I would willingly go to the manorhouse, be
boiled, and laid on a silver dish; all our forefathers have been treated
so; there is something extraordinary in it, you may be sure!”
“The manor-house has most likely fallen to ruin!” said Father Snail. “Or
the burdocks have grown up over it, so that they cannot come out. There
need not, however, be any haste about that; but you are always in such a
tremendous hurry, and the little one is beginning to be the same. Has he
not been creeping up that stalk these three days? It gives me a headache
when I look up to him!”
“You must not scold him,” said Mother Snail. “He creeps so carefully; he
will afford us much pleasure--and we have nothing but him to live for!
But have you not thought of it? Where shall we get a wife for him? Do
you not think that there are some of our species at a great distance in
the interior of the burdock forest?”
“Black snails, I dare say, there are enough of,” said the old one.
“Black snails without a house--but they are so common, and so conceited.
But we might give the ants a commission to look out for us; they run
to and fro as if they had something to do, and they certainly know of a
wife for our little snail!”
“I know one, sure enough--the most charming one!” said one of the ants.
“But I am afraid we shall hardly succeed, for she is a queen!”
“That is nothing!” said the old folks. “Has she a house?”
“She has a palace!” said the ant. “The finest ant’s palace, with seven
hundred passages!”
“I thank you!” said Mother Snail. “Our son shall not go into an
ant-hill; if you know nothing better than that, we shall give the
commission to the white gnats. They fly far and wide, in rain and
sunshine; they know the whole forest here, both within and without.”
“We have a wife for him,” said the gnats. “At a hundred human paces from
here there sits a little snail in her house, on a gooseberry bush; she
is quite lonely, and old enough to be married. It is only a hundred
human paces!”
“Well, then, let her come to him!” said the old ones. “He has a whole
forest of burdocks, she has only a bush!”
And so they went and fetched little Miss Snail. It was a whole week
before she arrived; but therein was just the very best of it, for one
could thus see that she was of the same species.
And then the marriage was celebrated. Six earth-worms shone as well as
they could. In other respects the whole went off very quietly, for the
old folks could not bear noise and merriment; but old Dame Snail made
a brilliant speech. Father Snail could not speak, he was too much
affected; and so they gave them as a dowry and inheritance, the whole
forest of burdocks, and said--what they had always said--that it was
the best in the world; and if they lived honestly and decently, and
increased and multiplied, they and their children would once in the
course of time come to the manor-house, be boiled black, and laid on
silver dishes. After this speech was made, the old ones crept into their
shells, and never more came out. They slept; the young couple governed
in the forest, and had a numerous progeny, but they were never boiled,
and never came on the silver dishes; so from this they concluded that
the manor-house had fallen to ruins, and that all the men in the world
were extinct; and as no one contradicted them, so, of course it was so.
And the rain beat on the dock-leaves to make drum-music for their sake,
and the sun shone in order to give the burdock forest a color for their
sakes; and they were very happy, and the whole family was happy; for
they, indeed were so.
THE STORY OF A MOTHER
A mother sat there with her little child. She was so downcast, so
afraid that it should die! It was so pale, the small eyes had closed
themselves, and it drew its breath so softly, now and then, with a
deep respiration, as if it sighed; and the mother looked still more
sorrowfully on the little creature.
Then a knocking was heard at the door, and in came a poor old man
wrapped up as in a large horse-cloth, for it warms one, and he needed
it, as it was the cold winter season! Everything out-of-doors was
covered with ice and snow, and the wind blew so that it cut the face.
As the old man trembled with cold, and the little child slept a moment,
the mother went and poured some ale into a pot and set it on the stove,
that it might be warm for him; the old man sat and rocked the cradle,
and the mother sat down on a chair close by him, and looked at her
little sick child that drew its breath so deep, and raised its little
hand.
“Do you not think that I shall save him?” said she. “Our Lord will not
take him from me!”
And the old man--it was Death himself--he nodded so strangely, it could
just as well signify yes as no. And the mother looked down in her lap,
and the tears ran down over her cheeks; her head became so heavy--she
had not closed her eyes for three days and nights; and now she slept,
but only for a minute, when she started up and trembled with cold.
“What is that?” said she, and looked on all sides; but the old man was
gone, and her little child was gone--he had taken it with him; and the
old clock in the corner burred, and burred, the great leaden weight ran
down to the floor, bump! and then the clock also stood still.
But the poor mother ran out of the house and cried aloud for her child.
Out there, in the midst of the snow, there sat a woman in long, black
clothes; and she said, “Death has been in thy chamber, and I saw him
hasten away with thy little child; he goes faster than the wind, and he
never brings back what he takes!”
“Oh, only tell me which way he went!” said the mother. “Tell me the way,
and I shall find him!”
“I know it!” said the woman in the black clothes. “But before I tell it,
thou must first sing for me all the songs thou hast sung for thy child!
I am fond of them. I have heard them before; I am Night; I saw thy tears
whilst thou sang’st them!”
“I will sing them all, all!” said the mother. “But do not stop me now--I
may overtake him--I may find my child!”
But Night stood still and mute. Then the mother wrung her hands, sang
and wept, and there were many songs, but yet many more tears; and then
Night said, “Go to the right, into the dark pine forest; thither I saw
Death take his way with thy little child!”
The roads crossed each other in the depths of the forest, and she no
longer knew whither she should go! then there stood a thorn-bush;
there was neither leaf nor flower on it, it was also in the cold winter
season, and ice-flakes hung on the branches.
“Hast thou not seen Death go past with my little child?” said the
mother.
“Yes,” said the thorn-bush; “but I will not tell thee which way he took,
unless thou wilt first warm me up at thy heart. I am freezing to death;
I shall become a lump of ice!”
And she pressed the thorn-bush to her breast, so firmly, that it might
be thoroughly warmed, and the thorns went right into her flesh, and her
blood flowed in large drops, but the thornbush shot forth fresh green
leaves, and there came flowers on it in the cold winter night, the heart
of the afflicted mother was so warm; and the thorn-bush told her the way
she should go.
She then came to a large lake, where there was neither ship nor boat.
The lake was not frozen sufficiently to bear her; neither was it open,
nor low enough that she could wade through it; and across it she must go
if she would find her child! Then she lay down to drink up the lake, and
that was an impossibility for a human being, but the afflicted mother
thought that a miracle might happen nevertheless.
“Oh, what would I not give to come to my child!” said the weeping
mother; and she wept still more, and her eyes sunk down in the depths of
the waters, and became two precious pearls; but the water bore her up,
as if she sat in a swing, and she flew in the rocking waves to the shore
on the opposite side, where there stood a mile-broad, strange house, one
knew not if it were a mountain with forests and caverns, or if it were
built up; but the poor mother could not see it; she had wept her eyes
out.
“Where shall I find Death, who took away my little child?” said she.
“He has not come here yet!” said the old grave woman, who was appointed
to look after Death’s great greenhouse! “How have you been able to find
the way hither? And who has helped you?”
“OUR LORD has helped me,” said she. “He is merciful, and you will also
be so! Where shall I find my little child?”
“Nay, I know not,” said the woman, “and you cannot see! Many flowers and
trees have withered this night; Death will soon come and plant them over
again! You certainly know that every person has his or her life’s tree
or flower, just as everyone happens to be settled; they look like other
plants, but they have pulsations of the heart. Children’s hearts can
also beat; go after yours, perhaps you may know your child’s; but what
will you give me if I tell you what you shall do more?”
“I have nothing to give,” said the afflicted mother, “but I will go to
the world’s end for you!”
“Nay, I have nothing to do there!” said the woman. “But you can give
me your long black hair; you know yourself that it is fine, and that
I like! You shall have my white hair instead, and that’s always
something!”
“Do you demand nothing else?” said she. “That I will gladly give you!”
 And she gave her her fine black hair, and got the old woman’s snow-white
hair instead.
So they went into Death’s great greenhouse, where flowers and trees
grew strangely into one another. There stood fine hyacinths under glass
bells, and there stood strong-stemmed peonies; there grew water plants,
some so fresh, others half sick, the water-snakes lay down on them,
and black crabs pinched their stalks. There stood beautiful palm-trees,
oaks, and plantains; there stood parsley and flowering thyme: every tree
and every flower had its name; each of them was a human life, the human
frame still lived--one in China, and another in Greenland--round about
in the world. There were large trees in small pots, so that they stood
so stunted in growth, and ready to burst the pots; in other places,
there was a little dull flower in rich mould, with moss round about it,
and it was so petted and nursed. But the distressed mother bent down
over all the smallest plants, and heard within them how the human heart
beat; and amongst millions she knew her child’s.
“There it is!” cried she, and stretched her hands out over a little blue
crocus, that hung quite sickly on one side.
“Don’t touch the flower!” said the old woman. “But place yourself here,
and when Death comes--I expect him every moment--do not let him pluck
the flower up, but threaten him that you will do the same with the
others. Then he will be afraid! He is responsible for them to OUR LORD,
and no one dares to pluck them up before HE gives leave.”
All at once an icy cold rushed through the great hall, and the blind
mother could feel that it was Death that came.
“How hast thou been able to find thy way hither?” he asked. “How couldst
thou come quicker than I?”
“I am a mother,” said she.
And Death stretched out his long hand towards the fine little flower,
but she held her hands fast around his, so tight, and yet afraid that
she should touch one of the leaves. Then Death blew on her hands, and
she felt that it was colder than the cold wind, and her hands fell down
powerless.
“Thou canst not do anything against me!” said Death.
“But OUR LORD can!” said she.
“I only do His bidding!” said Death. “I am His gardener, I take all His
flowers and trees, and plant them out in the great garden of Paradise,
in the unknown land; but how they grow there, and how it is there I dare
not tell thee.”
“Give me back my child!” said the mother, and she wept and prayed. At
once she seized hold of two beautiful flowers close by, with each hand,
and cried out to Death, “I will tear all thy flowers off, for I am in
despair.”
“Touch them not!” said Death. “Thou say’st that thou art so unhappy, and
now thou wilt make another mother equally unhappy.”
“Another mother!” said the poor woman, and directly let go her hold of
both the flowers.
“There, thou hast thine eyes,” said Death; “I fished them up from the
lake, they shone so bright; I knew not they were thine. Take them again,
they are now brighter than before; now look down into the deep well
close by; I shall tell thee the names of the two flowers thou wouldst
have torn up, and thou wilt see their whole future life--their whole
human existence: and see what thou wast about to disturb and destroy.”
And she looked down into the well; and it was a happiness to see how the
one became a blessing to the world, to see how much happiness and joy
were felt everywhere. And she saw the other’s life, and it was sorrow
and distress, horror, and wretchedness.
“Both of them are God’s will!” said Death.
“Which of them is Misfortune’s flower and which is that of Happiness?”
 asked she.
“That I will not tell thee,” said Death; “but this thou shalt know from
me, that the one flower was thy own child! it was thy child’s fate thou
saw’st--thy own child’s future life!”
Then the mother screamed with terror, “Which of them was my child? Tell
it me! Save the innocent! Save my child from all that misery! Rather
take it away! Take it into God’s kingdom! Forget my tears, forget my
prayers, and all that I have done!”
“I do not understand thee!” said Death. “Wilt thou have thy child again,
or shall I go with it there, where thou dost not know!”
Then the mother wrung her hands, fell on her knees, and prayed to our
Lord: “Oh, hear me not when I pray against Thy will, which is the best!
hear me not! hear me not!”
And she bowed her head down in her lap, and Death took her child and
went with it into the unknown land.
THE FALSE COLLAR
There was once a fine gentleman, all of whose moveables were a boot-jack
and a hair-comb: but he had the finest false collars in the world; and
it is about one of these collars that we are now to hear a story.
It was so old, that it began to think of marriage; and it happened that
it came to be washed in company with a garter.
“Nay!” said the collar. “I never did see anything so slender and so
fine, so soft and so neat. May I not ask your name?”
“That I shall not tell you!” said the garter.
“Where do you live?” asked the collar.
But the garter was so bashful, so modest, and thought it was a strange
question to answer.
“You are certainly a girdle,” said the collar; “that is to say an inside
girdle. I see well that you are both for use and ornament, my dear young
lady.”
“I will thank you not to speak to me,” said the garter. “I think I have
not given the least occasion for it.”
“Yes! When one is as handsome as you,” said the collar, “that is
occasion enough.”
“Don’t come so near me, I beg of you!” said the garter. “You look so
much like those men-folks.”
“I am also a fine gentleman,” said the collar. “I have a bootjack and a
hair-comb.”
But that was not true, for it was his master who had them: but he
boasted.
“Don’t come so near me,” said the garter: “I am not accustomed to it.”
“Prude!” exclaimed the collar; and then it was taken out of the
washing-tub. It was starched, hung over the back of a chair in the
sunshine, and was then laid on the ironing-blanket; then came the warm
box-iron. “Dear lady!” said the collar. “Dear widow-lady! I feel quite
hot. I am quite changed. I begin to unfold myself. You will burn a hole
in me. Oh! I offer you my hand.”
“Rag!” said the box-iron; and went proudly over the collar: for she
fancied she was a steam-engine, that would go on the railroad and draw
the waggons. “Rag!” said the box-iron.
The collar was a little jagged at the edge, and so came the long
scissors to cut off the jagged part. “Oh!” said the collar. “You are
certainly the first opera dancer. How well you can stretch your legs
out! It is the most graceful performance I have ever seen. No one can
imitate you.”
“I know it,” said the scissors.
“You deserve to be a baroness,” said the collar. “All that I have is a
fine gentleman, a boot-jack, and a hair-comb. If I only had the barony!”
“Do you seek my hand?” said the scissors; for she was angry; and without
more ado, she CUT HIM, and then he was condemned.
“I shall now be obliged to ask the hair-comb. It is surprising how well
you preserve your teeth, Miss,” said the collar. “Have you never thought
of being betrothed?”
“Yes, of course! you may be sure of that,” said the hair-comb. “I AM
betrothed--to the boot-jack!”
“Betrothed!” exclaimed the collar. Now there was no other to court, and
so he despised it.
A long time passed away, then the collar came into the rag chest at the
paper mill; there was a large company of rags, the fine by themselves,
and the coarse by themselves, just as it should be. They all had much to
say, but the collar the most; for he was a real boaster.
“I have had such an immense number of sweethearts!” said the collar.
“I could not be in peace! It is true, I was always a fine starched-up
gentleman! I had both a boot-jack and a hair-comb, which I never used!
You should have seen me then, you should have seen me when I lay down!
I shall never forget MY FIRST LOVE--she was a girdle, so fine, so soft,
and so charming, she threw herself into a tub of water for my sake!
There was also a widow, who became glowing hot, but I left her standing
till she got black again; there was also the first opera dancer, she
gave me that cut which I now go with, she was so ferocious! My
own hair-comb was in love with me, she lost all her teeth from the
heart-ache; yes, I have lived to see much of that sort of thing; but I
am extremely sorry for the garter--I mean the girdle--that went into the
water-tub. I have much on my conscience, I want to become white paper!”
And it became so, all the rags were turned into white paper; but the
collar came to be just this very piece of white paper we here see,
and on which the story is printed; and that was because it boasted so
terribly afterwards of what had never happened to it. It would be well
for us to beware, that we may not act in a similar manner, for we can
never know if we may not, in the course of time, also come into the
rag chest, and be made into white paper, and then have our whole life’s
history printed on it, even the most secret, and be obliged to run about
and tell it ourselves, just like this collar.
THE SHADOW
It is in the hot lands that the sun burns, sure enough! there the people
become quite a mahogany brown, ay, and in the HOTTEST lands they are
burnt to Negroes. But now it was only to the HOT lands that a learned
man had come from the cold; there he thought that he could run about
just as when at home, but he soon found out his mistake.
He, and all sensible folks, were obliged to stay within doors--the
window-shutters and doors were closed the whole day; it looked as if the
whole house slept, or there was no one at home.
The narrow street with the high houses, was built so that the sunshine
must fall there from morning till evening--it was really not to be
borne.
The learned man from the cold lands--he was a young man, and seemed to
be a clever man--sat in a glowing oven; it took effect on him, he became
quite meagre--even his shadow shrunk in, for the sun had also an effect
on it. It was first towards evening when the sun was down, that they
began to freshen up again.
In the warm lands every window has a balcony, and the people came out on
all the balconies in the street--for one must have air, even if one be
accustomed to be mahogany!* It was lively both up and down the
street. Tailors, and shoemakers, and all the folks, moved out into the
street--chairs and tables were brought forth--and candles burnt--yes,
above a thousand lights were burning--and the one talked and the other
sung; and people walked and church-bells rang, and asses went along with
a dingle-dingle-dong! for they too had bells on. The street boys were
screaming and hooting, and shouting and shooting, with devils and
detonating balls--and there came corpse bearers and hood wearers--for
there were funerals with psalm and hymn--and then the din of carriages
driving and company arriving: yes, it was, in truth, lively enough down
in the street. Only in that single house, which stood opposite that in
which the learned foreigner lived, it was quite still; and yet some one
lived there, for there stood flowers in the balcony--they grew so
well in the sun’s heat! and that they could not do unless they were
watered--and some one must water them--there must be somebody there.
The door opposite was also opened late in the evening, but it was dark
within, at least in the front room; further in there was heard the sound
of music. The learned foreigner thought it quite marvellous, but now--it
might be that he only imagined it--for he found everything marvellous
out there, in the warm lands, if there had only been no sun. The
stranger’s landlord said that he didn’t know who had taken the house
opposite, one saw no person about, and as to the music, it appeared
to him to be extremely tiresome. “It is as if some one sat there, and
practised a piece that he could not master--always the same piece. ‘I
shall master it!’ says he; but yet he cannot master it, however long he
plays.”
* The word mahogany can be understood, in Danish, as having two
meanings. In general, it means the reddish-brown wood itself; but in
jest, it signifies “excessively fine,” which arose from an anecdote of
Nyboder, in Copenhagen, (the seamen’s quarter.) A sailor’s wife, who was
always proud and fine, in her way, came to her neighbor, and complained
that she had got a splinter in her finger. “What of?” asked the
neighbor’s wife. “It is a mahogany splinter,” said the other. “Mahogany!
It cannot be less with you!” exclaimed the woman--and thence the
proverb, “It is so mahogany!”--(that is, so excessively fine)--is
derived.
One night the stranger awoke--he slept with the doors of the balcony
open--the curtain before it was raised by the wind, and he thought
that a strange lustre came from the opposite neighbor’s house; all the
flowers shone like flames, in the most beautiful colors, and in the
midst of the flowers stood a slender, graceful maiden--it was as if she
also shone; the light really hurt his eyes. He now opened them quite
wide--yes, he was quite awake; with one spring he was on the floor; he
crept gently behind the curtain, but the maiden was gone; the flowers
shone no longer, but there they stood, fresh and blooming as ever;
the door was ajar, and, far within, the music sounded so soft and
delightful, one could really melt away in sweet thoughts from it. Yet
it was like a piece of enchantment. And who lived there? Where was the
actual entrance? The whole of the ground-floor was a row of shops, and
there people could not always be running through.
One evening the stranger sat out on the balcony. The light burnt in the
room behind him; and thus it was quite natural that his shadow should
fall on his opposite neighbor’s wall. Yes! there it sat, directly
opposite, between the flowers on the balcony; and when the stranger
moved, the shadow also moved: for that it always does.
“I think my shadow is the only living thing one sees over there,” said
the learned man. “See, how nicely it sits between the flowers. The door
stands half-open: now the shadow should be cunning, and go into the
room, look about, and then come and tell me what it had seen. Come, now!
Be useful, and do me a service,” said he, in jest. “Have the kindness to
step in. Now! Art thou going?” and then he nodded to the shadow, and the
shadow nodded again. “Well then, go! But don’t stay away.”
The stranger rose, and his shadow on the opposite neighbor’s balcony
rose also; the stranger turned round and the shadow also turned round.
Yes! if anyone had paid particular attention to it, they would have
seen, quite distinctly, that the shadow went in through the half-open
balcony-door of their opposite neighbor, just as the stranger went into
his own room, and let the long curtain fall down after him.
Next morning, the learned man went out to drink coffee and read the
newspapers.
“What is that?” said he, as he came out into the sunshine. “I have no
shadow! So then, it has actually gone last night, and not come again. It
is really tiresome!”
This annoyed him: not so much because the shadow was gone, but because
he knew there was a story about a man without a shadow.* It was known
to everybody at home, in the cold lands; and if the learned man now came
there and told his story, they would say that he was imitating it, and
that he had no need to do. He would, therefore, not talk about it at
all; and that was wisely thought.
*Peter Schlemihl, the shadowless man.
In the evening he went out again on the balcony. He had placed the light
directly behind him, for he knew that the shadow would always have its
master for a screen, but he could not entice it. He made himself little;
he made himself great: but no shadow came again. He said, “Hem! hem!”
 but it was of no use.
It was vexatious; but in the warm lands everything grows so quickly; and
after the lapse of eight days he observed, to his great joy, that a new
shadow came in the sunshine. In the course of three weeks he had a very
fair shadow, which, when he set out for his home in the northern lands,
grew more and more in the journey, so that at last it was so long and so
large, that it was more than sufficient.
The learned man then came home, and he wrote books about what was true
in the world, and about what was good and what was beautiful; and there
passed days and years--yes! many years passed away.
One evening, as he was sitting in his room, there was a gentle knocking
“Come in!” said he; but no one came in; so he opened the door, and there
stood before him such an extremely lean man, that he felt quite strange.
As to the rest, the man was very finely dressed--he must be a gentleman.
“Whom have I the honor of speaking?” asked the learned man.
“Yes! I thought as much,” said the fine man. “I thought you would not
know me. I have got so much body. I have even got flesh and clothes. You
certainly never thought of seeing me so well off. Do you not know your
old shadow? You certainly thought I should never more return. Things
have gone on well with me since I was last with you. I have, in all
respects, become very well off. Shall I purchase my freedom from
service? If so, I can do it”; and then he rattled a whole bunch of
valuable seals that hung to his watch, and he stuck his hand in the
thick gold chain he wore around his neck--nay! how all his fingers
glittered with diamond rings; and then all were pure gems.
“Nay; I cannot recover from my surprise!” said the learned man. “What is
the meaning of all this?”
“Something common, is it not,” said the shadow. “But you yourself do not
belong to the common order; and I, as you know well, have from a child
followed in your footsteps. As soon as you found I was capable to go
out alone in the world, I went my own way. I am in the most brilliant
circumstances, but there came a sort of desire over me to see you once
more before you die; you will die, I suppose? I also wished to see this
land again--for you know we always love our native land. I know you have
got another shadow again; have I anything to pay to it or you? If so,
you will oblige me by saying what it is.”
“Nay, is it really thou?” said the learned man. “It is most remarkable:
I never imagined that one’s old shadow could come again as a man.”
“Tell me what I have to pay,” said the shadow; “for I don’t like to be
in any sort of debt.”
“How canst thou talk so?” said the learned man. “What debt is there to
talk about? Make thyself as free as anyone else. I am extremely glad to
hear of thy good fortune: sit down, old friend, and tell me a little
how it has gone with thee, and what thou hast seen at our opposite
neighbor’s there--in the warm lands.”
“Yes, I will tell you all about it,” said the shadow, and sat down: “but
then you must also promise me, that, wherever you may meet me, you will
never say to anyone here in the town that I have been your shadow. I
intend to get betrothed, for I can provide for more than one family.”
“Be quite at thy ease about that,” said the learned man; “I shall not
say to anyone who thou actually art: here is my hand--I promise it, and
a man’s bond is his word.”
“A word is a shadow,” said the shadow, “and as such it must speak.”
It was really quite astonishing how much of a man it was. It was dressed
entirely in black, and of the very finest cloth; it had patent leather
boots, and a hat that could be folded together, so that it was bare
crown and brim; not to speak of what we already know it had--seals, gold
neck-chain, and diamond rings; yes, the shadow was well-dressed, and it
was just that which made it quite a man.
“Now I shall tell you my adventures,” said the shadow; and then he
sat, with the polished boots, as heavily as he could, on the arm of the
learned man’s new shadow, which lay like a poodle-dog at his feet.
Now this was perhaps from arrogance; and the shadow on the ground kept
itself so still and quiet, that it might hear all that passed: it wished
to know how it could get free, and work its way up, so as to become its
own master.
“Do you know who lived in our opposite neighbor’s house?” said the
shadow. “It was the most charming of all beings, it was Poesy! I was
there for three weeks, and that has as much effect as if one had lived
three thousand years, and read all that was composed and written;
that is what I say, and it is right. I have seen everything and I know
everything!”
“Poesy!” cried the learned man. “Yes, yes, she often dwells a recluse
in large cities! Poesy! Yes, I have seen her--a single short moment,
but sleep came into my eyes! She stood on the balcony and shone as the
Aurora Borealis shines. Go on, go on--thou wert on the balcony, and went
through the doorway, and then--”
“Then I was in the antechamber,” said the shadow. “You always sat and
looked over to the antechamber. There was no light; there was a sort
of twilight, but the one door stood open directly opposite the other
through a long row of rooms and saloons, and there it was lighted up. I
should have been completely killed if I had gone over to the maiden; but
I was circumspect, I took time to think, and that one must always do.”
“And what didst thou then see?” asked the learned man.
“I saw everything, and I shall tell all to you: but--it is no pride on
my part--as a free man, and with the knowledge I have, not to speak of
my position in life, my excellent circumstances--I certainly wish that
you would say YOU* to me!”
* It is the custom in Denmark for intimate acquaintances to use the
second person singular, “Du,” (thou) when speaking to each other. When
a friendship is formed between men, they generally affirm it, when
occasion offers, either in public or private, by drinking to each other
and exclaiming, “thy health,” at the same time striking their glasses
together. This is called drinking “Duus”: they are then, “Duus Brodre,”
 (thou brothers) and ever afterwards use the pronoun “thou,” to each
other, it being regarded as more familiar than “De,” (you). Father and
mother, sister and brother say thou to one another--without regard to
age or rank. Master and mistress say thou to their servants the superior
to the inferior. But servants and inferiors do not use the same term
to their masters, or superiors--nor is it ever used when speaking to a
stranger, or anyone with whom they are but slightly acquainted--they
then say as in English--you.
“I beg your pardon,” said the learned man; “it is an old habit with me.
YOU are perfectly right, and I shall remember it; but now you must tell
me all YOU saw!”
“Everything!” said the shadow. “For I saw everything, and I know
“How did it look in the furthest saloon?” asked the learned man. “Was it
there as in the fresh woods? Was it there as in a holy church? Were the
saloons like the starlit firmament when we stand on the high mountains?”
“Everything was there!” said the shadow. “I did not go quite in, I
remained in the foremost room, in the twilight, but I stood there
quite well; I saw everything, and I know everything! I have been in the
antechamber at the court of Poesy.”
“But WHAT DID you see? Did all the gods of the olden times pass through
the large saloons? Did the old heroes combat there? Did sweet children
play there, and relate their dreams?”
“I tell you I was there, and you can conceive that I saw everything
there was to be seen. Had you come over there, you would not have been
a man; but I became so! And besides, I learned to know my inward nature,
my innate qualities, the relationship I had with Poesy. At the time I
was with you, I thought not of that, but always--you know it well--when
the sun rose, and when the sun went down, I became so strangely great;
in the moonlight I was very near being more distinct than yourself; at
that time I did not understand my nature; it was revealed to me in the
antechamber! I became a man! I came out matured; but you were no longer
in the warm lands; as a man I was ashamed to go as I did. I was in
want of boots, of clothes, of the whole human varnish that makes a man
perceptible. I took my way--I tell it to you, but you will not put it in
any book--I took my way to the cake woman--I hid myself behind her;
the woman didn’t think how much she concealed. I went out first in the
evening; I ran about the streets in the moonlight; I made myself long up
the walls--it tickles the back so delightfully! I ran up, and ran down,
peeped into the highest windows, into the saloons, and on the roofs, I
peeped in where no one could peep, and I saw what no one else saw, what
no one else should see! This is, in fact, a base world! I would not be a
man if it were not now once accepted and regarded as something to be so!
I saw the most unimaginable things with the women, with the men, with
parents, and with the sweet, matchless children; I saw,” said the
shadow, “what no human being must know, but what they would all
so willingly know--what is bad in their neighbor. Had I written a
newspaper, it would have been read! But I wrote direct to the persons
themselves, and there was consternation in all the towns where I came.
They were so afraid of me, and yet they were so excessively fond of
me. The professors made a professor of me; the tailors gave me new
clothes--I am well furnished; the master of the mint struck new coin for
me, and the women said I was so handsome! And so I became the man I am.
And I now bid you farewell. Here is my card--I live on the sunny side
of the street, and am always at home in rainy weather!” And so away went
the shadow. “That was most extraordinary!” said the learned man. Years
and days passed away, then the shadow came again. “How goes it?” said
the shadow.
“Alas!” said the learned man. “I write about the true, and the good,
and the beautiful, but no one cares to hear such things; I am quite
desperate, for I take it so much to heart!”
“But I don’t!” said the shadow. “I become fat, and it is that one wants
to become! You do not understand the world. You will become ill by it.
You must travel! I shall make a tour this summer; will you go with me?
I should like to have a travelling companion! Will you go with me, as
shadow? It will be a great pleasure for me to have you with me; I shall
pay the travelling expenses!”
“Nay, this is too much!” said the learned man.
“It is just as one takes it!” said the shadow. “It will do you much good
to travel! Will you be my shadow? You shall have everything free on the
journey!”
“Nay, that is too bad!” said the learned man.
“But it is just so with the world!” said the shadow, “and so it will
be!” and away it went again.
The learned man was not at all in the most enviable state; grief and
torment followed him, and what he said about the true, and the good, and
the beautiful, was, to most persons, like roses for a cow! He was quite
ill at last.
“You really look like a shadow!” said his friends to him; and the
learned man trembled, for he thought of it.
“You must go to a watering-place!” said the shadow, who came and visited
him. “There is nothing else for it! I will take you with me for old
acquaintance’ sake; I will pay the travelling expenses, and you write
the descriptions--and if they are a little amusing for me on the way!
I will go to a watering-place--my beard does not grow out as it
ought--that is also a sickness--and one must have a beard! Now you be
wise and accept the offer; we shall travel as comrades!”
And so they travelled; the shadow was master, and the master was the
shadow; they drove with each other, they rode and walked together, side
by side, before and behind, just as the sun was; the shadow always took
care to keep itself in the master’s place. Now the learned man didn’t
think much about that; he was a very kind-hearted man, and particularly
mild and friendly, and so he said one day to the shadow: “As we have
now become companions, and in this way have grown up together from
childhood, shall we not drink ‘thou’ together, it is more familiar?”
“You are right,” said the shadow, who was now the proper master. “It is
said in a very straight-forward and well-meant manner. You, as a learned
man, certainly know how strange nature is. Some persons cannot bear to
touch grey paper, or they become ill; others shiver in every limb if one
rub a pane of glass with a nail: I have just such a feeling on hearing
you say thou to me; I feel myself as if pressed to the earth in my first
situation with you. You see that it is a feeling; that it is not pride:
I cannot allow you to say THOU to me, but I will willingly say THOU to
you, so it is half done!”
So the shadow said THOU to its former master.
“This is rather too bad,” thought he, “that I must say YOU and he say
THOU,” but he was now obliged to put up with it.
So they came to a watering-place where there were many strangers, and
amongst them was a princess, who was troubled with seeing too well; and
that was so alarming!
She directly observed that the stranger who had just come was quite a
different sort of person to all the others; “He has come here in order
to get his beard to grow, they say, but I see the real cause, he cannot
cast a shadow.”
She had become inquisitive; and so she entered into conversation
directly with the strange gentleman, on their promenades. As the
daughter of a king, she needed not to stand upon trifles, so she said,
“Your complaint is, that you cannot cast a shadow?”
“Your Royal Highness must be improving considerably,” said the shadow,
“I know your complaint is, that you see too clearly, but it has
decreased, you are cured. I just happen to have a very unusual shadow!
Do you not see that person who always goes with me? Other persons have
a common shadow, but I do not like what is common to all. We give our
servants finer cloth for their livery than we ourselves use, and so I
had my shadow trimmed up into a man: yes, you see I have even given him
a shadow. It is somewhat expensive, but I like to have something for
myself!”
“What!” thought the princess. “Should I really be cured! These baths are
the first in the world! In our time water has wonderful powers. But I
shall not leave the place, for it now begins to be amusing here. I am
extremely fond of that stranger: would that his beard should not grow,
for in that case he will leave us!”
In the evening, the princess and the shadow danced together in the large
ball-room. She was light, but he was still lighter; she had never had
such a partner in the dance. She told him from what land she came, and
he knew that land; he had been there, but then she was not at home; he
had peeped in at the window, above and below--he had seen both the
one and the other, and so he could answer the princess, and make
insinuations, so that she was quite astonished; he must be the wisest
man in the whole world! She felt such respect for what he knew! So that
when they again danced together she fell in love with him; and that the
shadow could remark, for she almost pierced him through with her eyes.
So they danced once more together; and she was about to declare herself,
but she was discreet; she thought of her country and kingdom, and of the
many persons she would have to reign over.
“He is a wise man,” said she to herself--“It is well; and he dances
delightfully--that is also good; but has he solid knowledge? That is
just as important! He must be examined.”
So she began, by degrees, to question him about the most difficult
things she could think of, and which she herself could not have
answered; so that the shadow made a strange face.
“You cannot answer these questions?” said the princess.
“They belong to my childhood’s learning,” said the shadow. “I really
believe my shadow, by the door there, can answer them!”
“Your shadow!” said the princess. “That would indeed be marvellous!”
“I will not say for a certainty that he can,” said the shadow, “but I
think so; he has now followed me for so many years, and listened to my
conversation--I should think it possible. But your royal highness will
permit me to observe, that he is so proud of passing himself off for
a man, that when he is to be in a proper humor--and he must be so to
answer well--he must be treated quite like a man.”
“Oh! I like that!” said the princess.
So she went to the learned man by the door, and she spoke to him about
the sun and the moon, and about persons out of and in the world, and he
answered with wisdom and prudence.
“What a man that must be who has so wise a shadow!” thought she. “It
will be a real blessing to my people and kingdom if I choose him for my
consort--I will do it!”
They were soon agreed, both the princess and the shadow; but no one was
to know about it before she arrived in her own kingdom.
“No one--not even my shadow!” said the shadow, and he had his own
thoughts about it!
Now they were in the country where the princess reigned when she was at
“Listen, my good friend,” said the shadow to the learned man. “I have
now become as happy and mighty as anyone can be; I will, therefore, do
something particular for thee! Thou shalt always live with me in the
palace, drive with me in my royal carriage, and have ten thousand
pounds a year; but then thou must submit to be called SHADOW by all and
everyone; thou must not say that thou hast ever been a man; and once
a year, when I sit on the balcony in the sunshine, thou must lie at my
feet, as a shadow shall do! I must tell thee: I am going to marry the
king’s daughter, and the nuptials are to take place this evening!”
“Nay, this is going too far!” said the learned man. “I will not have it;
I will not do it! It is to deceive the whole country and the princess
too! I will tell everything! That I am a man, and that thou art a
shadow--thou art only dressed up!”
“There is no one who will believe it!” said the shadow. “Be reasonable,
or I will call the guard!”
“I will go directly to the princess!” said the learned man.
“But I will go first!” said the shadow. “And thou wilt go to prison!”
 and that he was obliged to do--for the sentinels obeyed him whom they
knew the king’s daughter was to marry.
“You tremble!” said the princess, as the shadow came into her chamber.
“Has anything happened? You must not be unwell this evening, now that we
are to have our nuptials celebrated.”
“I have lived to see the most cruel thing that anyone can live to
see!” said the shadow. “Only imagine--yes, it is true, such a poor
shadow-skull cannot bear much--only think, my shadow has become mad;
he thinks that he is a man, and that I--now only think--that I am his
shadow!”
“It is terrible!” said the princess; “but he is confined, is he not?”
“That he is. I am afraid that he will never recover.”
“Poor shadow!” said the princess. “He is very unfortunate; it would be
a real work of charity to deliver him from the little life he has, and,
when I think properly over the matter, I am of opinion that it will be
necessary to do away with him in all stillness!”
“It is certainly hard,” said the shadow, “for he was a faithful
servant!” and then he gave a sort of sigh.
“You are a noble character!” said the princess.
The whole city was illuminated in the evening, and the cannons went off
with a bum! bum! and the soldiers presented arms. That was a marriage!
The princess and the shadow went out on the balcony to show themselves,
and get another hurrah!
The learned man heard nothing of all this--for they had deprived him of
life.
THE LITTLE MATCH GIRL
Most terribly cold it was; it snowed, and was nearly quite dark, and
evening--the last evening of the year. In this cold and darkness there
went along the street a poor little girl, bareheaded, and with naked
feet. When she left home she had slippers on, it is true; but what was
the good of that? They were very large slippers, which her mother had
hitherto worn; so large were they; and the poor little thing lost them
as she scuffled away across the street, because of two carriages that
rolled by dreadfully fast.
One slipper was nowhere to be found; the other had been laid hold of by
an urchin, and off he ran with it; he thought it would do capitally for
a cradle when he some day or other should have children himself. So the
little maiden walked on with her tiny naked feet, that were quite red
and blue from cold. She carried a quantity of matches in an old apron,
and she held a bundle of them in her hand. Nobody had bought anything of
her the whole livelong day; no one had given her a single farthing.
She crept along trembling with cold and hunger--a very picture of
sorrow, the poor little thing!
The flakes of snow covered her long fair hair, which fell in beautiful
curls around her neck; but of that, of course, she never once now
thought. From all the windows the candles were gleaming, and it smelt so
deliciously of roast goose, for you know it was New Year’s Eve; yes, of
that she thought.
In a corner formed by two houses, of which one advanced more than the
other, she seated herself down and cowered together. Her little feet
she had drawn close up to her, but she grew colder and colder, and to go
home she did not venture, for she had not sold any matches and could
not bring a farthing of money: from her father she would certainly get
blows, and at home it was cold too, for above her she had only the roof,
through which the wind whistled, even though the largest cracks were
stopped up with straw and rags.
Her little hands were almost numbed with cold. Oh! a match might afford
her a world of comfort, if she only dared take a single one out of the
bundle, draw it against the wall, and warm her fingers by it. She drew
one out. “Rischt!” how it blazed, how it burnt! It was a warm, bright
flame, like a candle, as she held her hands over it: it was a wonderful
light. It seemed really to the little maiden as though she were sitting
before a large iron stove, with burnished brass feet and a brass
ornament at top. The fire burned with such blessed influence; it warmed
so delightfully. The little girl had already stretched out her feet to
warm them too; but--the small flame went out, the stove vanished: she
had only the remains of the burnt-out match in her hand.
She rubbed another against the wall: it burned brightly, and where the
light fell on the wall, there the wall became transparent like a
veil, so that she could see into the room. On the table was spread a
snow-white tablecloth; upon it was a splendid porcelain service, and the
roast goose was steaming famously with its stuffing of apple and dried
plums. And what was still more capital to behold was, the goose hopped
down from the dish, reeled about on the floor with knife and fork in its
breast, till it came up to the poor little girl; when--the match went
out and nothing but the thick, cold, damp wall was left behind.
She lighted another match. Now there she was sitting under the most
magnificent Christmas tree: it was still larger, and more decorated than
the one which she had seen through the glass door in the rich merchant’s
house.
Thousands of lights were burning on the green branches, and
gaily-colored pictures, such as she had seen in the shop-windows, looked
down upon her. The little maiden stretched out her hands towards them
when--the match went out. The lights of the Christmas tree rose higher
and higher, she saw them now as stars in heaven; one fell down and
formed a long trail of fire.
“Someone is just dead!” said the little girl; for her old grandmother,
the only person who had loved her, and who was now no more, had told
her, that when a star falls, a soul ascends to God.
She drew another match against the wall: it was again light, and in the
lustre there stood the old grandmother, so bright and radiant, so mild,
and with such an expression of love.
“Grandmother!” cried the little one. “Oh, take me with you! You go
away when the match burns out; you vanish like the warm stove, like the
delicious roast goose, and like the magnificent Christmas tree!” And
she rubbed the whole bundle of matches quickly against the wall, for
she wanted to be quite sure of keeping her grandmother near her. And
the matches gave such a brilliant light that it was brighter than at
noon-day: never formerly had the grandmother been so beautiful and
so tall. She took the little maiden, on her arm, and both flew in
brightness and in joy so high, so very high, and then above was neither
cold, nor hunger, nor anxiety--they were with God.
But in the corner, at the cold hour of dawn, sat the poor girl, with
rosy cheeks and with a smiling mouth, leaning against the wall--frozen
to death on the last evening of the old year. Stiff and stark sat the
child there with her matches, of which one bundle had been burnt. “She
wanted to warm herself,” people said. No one had the slightest suspicion
of what beautiful things she had seen; no one even dreamed of the
splendor in which, with her grandmother she had entered on the joys of a
new year.
THE DREAM OF LITTLE TUK
Ah! yes, that was little Tuk: in reality his name was not Tuk, but that
was what he called himself before he could speak plain: he meant it for
Charles, and it is all well enough if one does but know it. He had now
to take care of his little sister Augusta, who was much younger than
himself, and he was, besides, to learn his lesson at the same time; but
these two things would not do together at all. There sat the poor little
fellow, with his sister on his lap, and he sang to her all the songs he
knew; and he glanced the while from time to time into the geography-book
that lay open before him. By the next morning he was to have learnt
all the towns in Zealand by heart, and to know about them all that is
possible to be known.
His mother now came home, for she had been out, and took little Augusta
on her arm. Tuk ran quickly to the window, and read so eagerly that he
pretty nearly read his eyes out; for it got darker and darker, but his
mother had no money to buy a candle.
“There goes the old washerwoman over the way,” said his mother, as she
looked out of the window. “The poor woman can hardly drag herself along,
and she must now drag the pail home from the fountain. Be a good boy,
Tukey, and run across and help the old woman, won’t you?”
So Tuk ran over quickly and helped her; but when he came back again into
the room it was quite dark, and as to a light, there was no thought of
such a thing. He was now to go to bed; that was an old turn-up bedstead;
in it he lay and thought about his geography lesson, and of Zealand, and
of all that his master had told him. He ought, to be sure, to have read
over his lesson again, but that, you know, he could not do. He therefore
put his geography-book under his pillow, because he had heard that was
a very good thing to do when one wants to learn one’s lesson; but one
cannot, however, rely upon it entirely. Well, there he lay, and thought
and thought, and all at once it was just as if someone kissed his eyes
and mouth: he slept, and yet he did not sleep; it was as though the old
washerwoman gazed on him with her mild eyes and said, “It were a great
sin if you were not to know your lesson tomorrow morning. You have aided
me, I therefore will now help you; and the loving God will do so at all
times.” And all of a sudden the book under Tuk’s pillow began scraping
and scratching.
“Kickery-ki! kluk! kluk! kluk!”--that was an old hen who came creeping
along, and she was from Kjoge. “I am a Kjoger hen,” said she, and then
she related how many inhabitants there were there, and about the battle
that had taken place, and which, after all, was hardly worth talking
     * Kjoge, a town in the bay of Kjoge. “To see the Kjoge
     hens,” is an expression similar to “showing a child London,”
      which is said to be done by taking his head in both bands,
     and so lifting him off the ground. At the invasion of the
     English in 1807, an encounter of a no very glorious nature
     took place between the British troops and the undisciplined
     Danish militia.
“Kribledy, krabledy--plump!” down fell somebody: it was a wooden bird,
the popinjay used at the shooting-matches at Prastoe. Now he said that
there were just as many inhabitants as he had nails in his body; and he
was very proud. “Thorwaldsen lived almost next door to me.* Plump! Here
I lie capitally.”
* Prastoe, a still smaller town than Kjoge. Some hundred paces from
it lies the manor-house Ny Soe, where Thorwaldsen, the famed sculptor,
generally sojourned during his stay in Denmark, and where he called many
of his immortal works into existence.
But little Tuk was no longer lying down: all at once he was on
horseback. On he went at full gallop, still galloping on and on. A
knight with a gleaming plume, and most magnificently dressed, held him
before him on the horse, and thus they rode through the wood to the old
town of Bordingborg, and that was a large and very lively town. High
towers rose from the castle of the king, and the brightness of many
candles streamed from all the windows; within was dance and song,
and King Waldemar and the young, richly-attired maids of honor danced
together. The morn now came; and as soon as the sun appeared, the whole
town and the king’s palace crumbled together, and one tower after the
other; and at last only a single one remained standing where the castle
had been before,* and the town was so small and poor, and the school
boys came along with their books under their arms, and said, “2000
inhabitants!” but that was not true, for there were not so many.
*Bordingborg, in the reign of King Waldemar, a considerable place, now
an unimportant little town. One solitary tower only, and some remains of
a wall, show where the castle once stood.
And little Tukey lay in his bed: it seemed to him as if he dreamed, and
yet as if he were not dreaming; however, somebody was close beside him.
“Little Tukey! Little Tukey!” cried someone near. It was a seaman,
quite a little personage, so little as if he were a midshipman; but a
midshipman it was not.
“Many remembrances from Corsor.* That is a town that is just rising
into importance; a lively town that has steam-boats and stagecoaches:
formerly people called it ugly, but that is no longer true. I lie on
the sea,” said Corsor; “I have high roads and gardens, and I have given
birth to a poet who was witty and amusing, which all poets are not. I
once intended to equip a ship that was to sail all round the earth; but
I did not do it, although I could have done so: and then, too, I smell
so deliciously, for close before the gate bloom the most beautiful
roses.”
*Corsor, on the Great Belt, called, formerly, before the introduction
of steam-vessels, when travellers were often obliged to wait a long time
for a favorable wind, “the most tiresome of towns.” The poet Baggesen
was born here.
Little Tuk looked, and all was red and green before his eyes; but as
soon as the confusion of colors was somewhat over, all of a sudden there
appeared a wooded slope close to the bay, and high up above stood a
magnificent old church, with two high pointed towers. From out the
hill-side spouted fountains in thick streams of water, so that there
was a continual splashing; and close beside them sat an old king with
a golden crown upon his white head: that was King Hroar, near the
fountains, close to the town of Roeskilde, as it is now called. And up
the slope into the old church went all the kings and queens of Denmark,
hand in hand, all with their golden crowns; and the organ played and
the fountains rustled. Little Tuk saw all, heard all. “Do not forget the
diet,” said King Hroar.*
*Roeskilde, once the capital of Denmark. The town takes its name from
King Hroar, and the many fountains in the neighborhood. In the beautiful
cathedral the greater number of the kings and queens of Denmark are
interred. In Roeskilde, too, the members of the Danish Diet assemble.
Again all suddenly disappeared. Yes, and whither? It seemed to him
just as if one turned over a leaf in a book. And now stood there an
old peasant-woman, who came from Soroe,* where grass grows in the
market-place. She had an old grey linen apron hanging over her head and
back: it was so wet, it certainly must have been raining. “Yes, that it
has,” said she; and she now related many pretty things out of Holberg’s
comedies, and about Waldemar and Absalon; but all at once she cowered
together, and her head began shaking backwards and forwards, and she
looked as she were going to make a spring. “Croak! croak!” said she.
“It is wet, it is wet; there is such a pleasant deathlike stillness in
Sorbe!” She was now suddenly a frog, “Croak”; and now she was an old
woman. “One must dress according to the weather,” said she. “It is wet;
it is wet. My town is just like a bottle; and one gets in by the neck,
and by the neck one must get out again! In former times I had the
finest fish, and now I have fresh rosy-cheeked boys at the bottom of the
bottle, who learn wisdom, Hebrew, Greek--Croak!”
* Sorbe, a very quiet little town, beautifully situated, surrounded by
woods and lakes. Holberg, Denmark’s Moliere, founded here an academy
for the sons of the nobles. The poets Hauch and Ingemann were appointed
professors here. The latter lives there still.
When she spoke it sounded just like the noise of frogs, or as if one
walked with great boots over a moor; always the same tone, so uniform
and so tiring that little Tuk fell into a good sound sleep, which, by
the bye, could not do him any harm.
But even in this sleep there came a dream, or whatever else it was: his
little sister Augusta, she with the blue eyes and the fair curling hair,
was suddenly a tall, beautiful girl, and without having wings was yet
able to fly; and she now flew over Zealand--over the green woods and the
blue lakes.
“Do you hear the cock crow, Tukey? Cock-a-doodle-doo! The cocks are
flying up from Kjoge! You will have a farm-yard, so large, oh! so very
large! You will suffer neither hunger nor thirst! You will get on in the
world! You will be a rich and happy man! Your house will exalt itself
like King Waldemar’s tower, and will be richly decorated with marble
statues, like that at Prastoe. You understand what I mean. Your name
shall circulate with renown all round the earth, like unto the ship that
was to have sailed from Corsor; and in Roeskilde--”
“Do not forget the diet!” said King Hroar.
“Then you will speak well and wisely, little Tukey; and when at last you
sink into your grave, you shall sleep as quietly--”
“As if I lay in Soroe,” said Tuk, awaking. It was bright day, and he was
now quite unable to call to mind his dream; that, however, was not at
all necessary, for one may not know what the future will bring.
And out of bed he jumped, and read in his book, and now all at once he
knew his whole lesson. And the old washerwoman popped her head in at the
door, nodded to him friendly, and said, “Thanks, many thanks, my good
child, for your help! May the good ever-loving God fulfil your loveliest
dream!”
Little Tukey did not at all know what he had dreamed, but the loving God
knew it.
THE NAUGHTY BOY
Along time ago, there lived an old poet, a thoroughly kind old poet. As
he was sitting one evening in his room, a dreadful storm arose without,
and the rain streamed down from heaven; but the old poet sat warm
and comfortable in his chimney-corner, where the fire blazed and the
roasting apple hissed.
“Those who have not a roof over their heads will be wetted to the skin,”
 said the good old poet.
“Oh let me in! Let me in! I am cold, and I’m so wet!” exclaimed suddenly
a child that stood crying at the door and knocking for admittance, while
the rain poured down, and the wind made all the windows rattle.
“Poor thing!” said the old poet, as he went to open the door. There
stood a little boy, quite naked, and the water ran down from his long
golden hair; he trembled with cold, and had he not come into a warm room
he would most certainly have perished in the frightful tempest.
“Poor child!” said the old poet, as he took the boy by the hand. “Come
in, come in, and I will soon restore thee! Thou shalt have wine and
roasted apples, for thou art verily a charming child!” And the boy was
so really. His eyes were like two bright stars; and although the water
trickled down his hair, it waved in beautiful curls. He looked exactly
like a little angel, but he was so pale, and his whole body trembled
with cold. He had a nice little bow in his hand, but it was quite
spoiled by the rain, and the tints of his many-colored arrows ran one
into the other.
The old poet seated himself beside his hearth, and took the little
fellow on his lap; he squeezed the water out of his dripping hair,
warmed his hands between his own, and boiled for him some sweet wine.
Then the boy recovered, his cheeks again grew rosy, he jumped down from
the lap where he was sitting, and danced round the kind old poet.
“You are a merry fellow,” said the old man. “What’s your name?”
“My name is Cupid,” answered the boy. “Don’t you know me? There lies my
bow; it shoots well, I can assure you! Look, the weather is now clearing
up, and the moon is shining clear again through the window.”
“Why, your bow is quite spoiled,” said the old poet.
“That were sad indeed,” said the boy, and he took the bow in his hand
and examined it on every side. “Oh, it is dry again, and is not hurt at
all; the string is quite tight. I will try it directly.” And he bent his
bow, took aim, and shot an arrow at the old poet, right into his heart.
“You see now that my bow was not spoiled,” said he laughing; and away he
ran.
The naughty boy, to shoot the old poet in that way; he who had taken him
into his warm room, who had treated him so kindly, and who had given him
warm wine and the very best apples!
The poor poet lay on the earth and wept, for the arrow had really flown
into his heart.
“Fie!” said he. “How naughty a boy Cupid is! I will tell all children
about him, that they may take care and not play with him, for he will
only cause them sorrow and many a heartache.”
And all good children to whom he related this story, took great heed
of this naughty Cupid; but he made fools of them still, for he is
astonishingly cunning. When the university students come from the
lectures, he runs beside them in a black coat, and with a book under his
arm. It is quite impossible for them to know him, and they walk along
with him arm in arm, as if he, too, were a student like themselves; and
then, unperceived, he thrusts an arrow to their bosom. When the young
maidens come from being examined by the clergyman, or go to church to
be confirmed, there he is again close behind them. Yes, he is forever
following people. At the play, he sits in the great chandelier and burns
in bright flames, so that people think it is really a flame, but they
soon discover it is something else. He roves about in the garden of the
palace and upon the ramparts: yes, once he even shot your father and
mother right in the heart. Ask them only and you will hear what they’ll
tell you. Oh, he is a naughty boy, that Cupid; you must never have
anything to do with him. He is forever running after everybody. Only
think, he shot an arrow once at your old grandmother! But that is a
long time ago, and it is all past now; however, a thing of that sort she
never forgets. Fie, naughty Cupid! But now you know him, and you know,
too, how ill-behaved he is!
THE RED SHOES
There was once a little girl who was very pretty and delicate, but in
summer she was forced to run about with bare feet, she was so poor, and
in winter wear very large wooden shoes, which made her little insteps
quite red, and that looked so dangerous!
In the middle of the village lived old Dame Shoemaker; she sat and sewed
together, as well as she could, a little pair of shoes out of old red
strips of cloth; they were very clumsy, but it was a kind thought. They
were meant for the little girl. The little girl was called Karen.
On the very day her mother was buried, Karen received the red shoes,
and wore them for the first time. They were certainly not intended for
mourning, but she had no others, and with stockingless feet she followed
the poor straw coffin in them.
Suddenly a large old carriage drove up, and a large old lady sat in it:
she looked at the little girl, felt compassion for her, and then said to
the clergyman:
“Here, give me the little girl. I will adopt her!”
And Karen believed all this happened on account of the red shoes, but
the old lady thought they were horrible, and they were burnt. But Karen
herself was cleanly and nicely dressed; she must learn to read and sew;
and people said she was a nice little thing, but the looking-glass said:
“Thou art more than nice, thou art beautiful!”
Now the queen once travelled through the land, and she had her little
daughter with her. And this little daughter was a princess, and people
streamed to the castle, and Karen was there also, and the little
princess stood in her fine white dress, in a window, and let herself be
stared at; she had neither a train nor a golden crown, but splendid
red morocco shoes. They were certainly far handsomer than those Dame
Shoemaker had made for little Karen. Nothing in the world can be
compared with red shoes.
Now Karen was old enough to be confirmed; she had new clothes and was to
have new shoes also. The rich shoemaker in the city took the measure of
her little foot. This took place at his house, in his room; where stood
large glass-cases, filled with elegant shoes and brilliant boots. All
this looked charming, but the old lady could not see well, and so had
no pleasure in them. In the midst of the shoes stood a pair of red ones,
just like those the princess had worn. How beautiful they were! The
shoemaker said also they had been made for the child of a count, but had
not fitted.
“That must be patent leather!” said the old lady. “They shine so!”
“Yes, they shine!” said Karen, and they fitted, and were bought, but the
old lady knew nothing about their being red, else she would never have
allowed Karen to have gone in red shoes to be confirmed. Yet such was
the case.
Everybody looked at her feet; and when she stepped through the chancel
door on the church pavement, it seemed to her as if the old figures on
the tombs, those portraits of old preachers and preachers’ wives, with
stiff ruffs, and long black dresses, fixed their eyes on her red shoes.
And she thought only of them as the clergyman laid his hand upon her
head, and spoke of the holy baptism, of the covenant with God, and how
she should be now a matured Christian; and the organ pealed so solemnly;
the sweet children’s voices sang, and the old music-directors sang, but
Karen only thought of her red shoes.
In the afternoon, the old lady heard from everyone that the shoes had
been red, and she said that it was very wrong of Karen, that it was not
at all becoming, and that in future Karen should only go in black shoes
to church, even when she should be older.
The next Sunday there was the sacrament, and Karen looked at the black
shoes, looked at the red ones--looked at them again, and put on the red
shoes.
The sun shone gloriously; Karen and the old lady walked along the path
through the corn; it was rather dusty there.
At the church door stood an old soldier with a crutch, and with a
wonderfully long beard, which was more red than white, and he bowed to
the ground, and asked the old lady whether he might dust her shoes. And
Karen stretched out her little foot.
“See, what beautiful dancing shoes!” said the soldier. “Sit firm when
you dance”; and he put his hand out towards the soles.
And the old lady gave the old soldier alms, and went into the church
with Karen.
And all the people in the church looked at Karen’s red shoes, and all
the pictures, and as Karen knelt before the altar, and raised the cup to
her lips, she only thought of the red shoes, and they seemed to swim
in it; and she forgot to sing her psalm, and she forgot to pray, “Our
Father in Heaven!”
Now all the people went out of church, and the old lady got into her
carriage. Karen raised her foot to get in after her, when the old
soldier said,
“Look, what beautiful dancing shoes!”
And Karen could not help dancing a step or two, and when she began her
feet continued to dance; it was just as though the shoes had power over
them. She danced round the church corner, she could not leave off; the
coachman was obliged to run after and catch hold of her, and he lifted
her in the carriage, but her feet continued to dance so that she trod on
the old lady dreadfully. At length she took the shoes off, and then her
legs had peace.
The shoes were placed in a closet at home, but Karen could not avoid
looking at them.
Now the old lady was sick, and it was said she could not recover. She
must be nursed and waited upon, and there was no one whose duty it was
so much as Karen’s. But there was a great ball in the city, to which
Karen was invited. She looked at the old lady, who could not recover,
she looked at the red shoes, and she thought there could be no sin in
it; she put on the red shoes, she might do that also, she thought. But
then she went to the ball and began to dance.
When she wanted to dance to the right, the shoes would dance to the
left, and when she wanted to dance up the room, the shoes danced back
again, down the steps, into the street, and out of the city gate. She
danced, and was forced to dance straight out into the gloomy wood.
Then it was suddenly light up among the trees, and she fancied it must
be the moon, for there was a face; but it was the old soldier with
the red beard; he sat there, nodded his head, and said, “Look, what
beautiful dancing shoes!”
Then she was terrified, and wanted to fling off the red shoes, but they
clung fast; and she pulled down her stockings, but the shoes seemed to
have grown to her feet. And she danced, and must dance, over fields and
meadows, in rain and sunshine, by night and day; but at night it was the
most fearful.
She danced over the churchyard, but the dead did not dance--they had
something better to do than to dance. She wished to seat herself on a
poor man’s grave, where the bitter tansy grew; but for her there was
neither peace nor rest; and when she danced towards the open church
door, she saw an angel standing there. He wore long, white garments; he
had wings which reached from his shoulders to the earth; his countenance
was severe and grave; and in his hand he held a sword, broad and
glittering.
“Dance shalt thou!” said he. “Dance in thy red shoes till thou art pale
and cold! Till thy skin shrivels up and thou art a skeleton! Dance shalt
thou from door to door, and where proud, vain children dwell, thou shalt
knock, that they may hear thee and tremble! Dance shalt thou--!”
“Mercy!” cried Karen. But she did not hear the angel’s reply, for the
shoes carried her through the gate into the fields, across roads and
bridges, and she must keep ever dancing.
One morning she danced past a door which she well knew. Within sounded
a psalm; a coffin, decked with flowers, was borne forth. Then she knew
that the old lady was dead, and felt that she was abandoned by all, and
condemned by the angel of God.
She danced, and she was forced to dance through the gloomy night. The
shoes carried her over stack and stone; she was torn till she bled; she
danced over the heath till she came to a little house. Here, she knew,
dwelt the executioner; and she tapped with her fingers at the window,
and said, “Come out! Come out! I cannot come in, for I am forced to
dance!”
And the executioner said, “Thou dost not know who I am, I fancy? I
strike bad people’s heads off; and I hear that my axe rings!”
“Don’t strike my head off!” said Karen. “Then I can’t repent of my sins!
But strike off my feet in the red shoes!”
And then she confessed her entire sin, and the executioner struck off
her feet with the red shoes, but the shoes danced away with the little
feet across the field into the deep wood.
And he carved out little wooden feet for her, and crutches, taught
her the psalm criminals always sing; and she kissed the hand which had
wielded the axe, and went over the heath.
“Now I have suffered enough for the red shoes!” said she. “Now I will
go into the church that people may see me!” And she hastened towards the
church door: but when she was near it, the red shoes danced before her,
and she was terrified, and turned round. The whole week she was unhappy,
and wept many bitter tears; but when Sunday returned, she said, “Well,
now I have suffered and struggled enough! I really believe I am as good
as many a one who sits in the church, and holds her head so high!”
And away she went boldly; but she had not got farther than the
churchyard gate before she saw the red shoes dancing before her; and she
was frightened, and turned back, and repented of her sin from her heart.
And she went to the parsonage, and begged that they would take her
into service; she would be very industrious, she said, and would do
everything she could; she did not care about the wages, only she wished
to have a home, and be with good people. And the clergyman’s wife was
sorry for her and took her into service; and she was industrious and
thoughtful. She sat still and listened when the clergyman read the Bible
in the evenings. All the children thought a great deal of her; but when
they spoke of dress, and grandeur, and beauty, she shook her head.
The following Sunday, when the family was going to church, they asked
her whether she would not go with them; but she glanced sorrowfully,
with tears in her eyes, at her crutches. The family went to hear the
word of God; but she went alone into her little chamber; there was only
room for a bed and chair to stand in it; and here she sat down with her
Prayer-Book; and whilst she read with a pious mind, the wind bore
the strains of the organ towards her, and she raised her tearful
countenance, and said, “O God, help me!”
And the sun shone so clearly, and straight before her stood the angel
of God in white garments, the same she had seen that night at the church
door; but he no longer carried the sharp sword, but in its stead a
splendid green spray, full of roses. And he touched the ceiling with the
spray, and the ceiling rose so high, and where he had touched it there
gleamed a golden star. And he touched the walls, and they widened out,
and she saw the organ which was playing; she saw the old pictures of the
preachers and the preachers’ wives. The congregation sat in cushioned
seats, and sang out of their Prayer-Books. For the church itself had
come to the poor girl in her narrow chamber, or else she had come into
the church. She sat in the pew with the clergyman’s family, and when
they had ended the psalm and looked up, they nodded and said, “It is
right that thou art come!”
“It was through mercy!” she said.
And the organ pealed, and the children’s voices in the choir sounded so
sweet and soft! The clear sunshine streamed so warmly through the window
into the pew where Karen sat! Her heart was so full of sunshine, peace,
and joy, that it broke. Her soul flew on the sunshine to God, and there
no one asked after the RED SHOES.
ST. GEORGE OF MERRIE ENGLAND
In the darksome depths of a thick forest lived Kalyb the fell
enchantress. Terrible were her deeds, and few there were who had the
hardihood to sound the brazen trumpet which hung over the iron gate that
barred the way to the Abode of Witchcraft. Terrible were the deeds of
Kalyb; but above all things she delighted in carrying off innocent
new-born babes, and putting them to death.
And this, doubtless, she meant to be the fate of the infant son of the
Earl of Coventry, who long long years ago was Lord High Steward of
England. Certain it is that the babe's father being absent, and his
mother dying at his birth, the wicked Kalyb, with spells and charms,
managed to steal the child from his careless nurses.
But the babe was marked from the first for doughty deeds; for on his
breast was pictured the living image of a dragon, on his right hand was
a blood-red cross, and on his left leg showed the golden garter.
And these signs so affected Kalyb, the fell enchantress, that she stayed
her hand; and the child growing daily in beauty and stature, he became
to her as the apple of her eye. Now, when twice seven years had passed
the boy began to thirst for honourable adventures, though the wicked
enchantress wished to keep him as her own.
But he, seeking glory, utterly disdained so wicked a creature; thus she
sought to bribe him. And one day, taking him by the hand, she led him to
a brazen castle and showed him six brave knights, prisoners therein.
Then said she:
"Lo! These be the six champions of Christendom. Thou shalt be the
seventh and thy name shall be St. George of Merrie England if thou wilt
stay with me."
But he would not.
Then she led him into a magnificent stable where stood seven of the most
beautiful steeds ever seen. "Six of these," said she, "belong to the six
Champions. The seventh and the best, the swiftest and the most powerful
in the world, whose name is Bayard, will I bestow on thee, if thou wilt
Then she took him to the armoury, and with her own hand buckled on a
corselet of purest steel, and laced on a helmet inlaid with gold. Then,
taking a mighty falchion, she gave it into his hand, and said: "This
armour which none can pierce, this sword called Ascalon, which will hew
in sunder all it touches, are thine; surely now thou wilt stop with me?"
Then she bribed him with her own magic wand, thus giving him power over
all things in that enchanted land, saying:
"Surely now wilt thou remain here?"
But he, taking the wand, struck with it a mighty rock that stood by; and
lo! it opened, and laid in view a wide cave garnished by the bodies of a
vast number of innocent new-born infants whom the wicked enchantress had
murdered.
Thus, using her power, he bade the sorceress lead the way into the place
of horror, and when she had entered, he raised the magic wand yet again,
and smote the rock; and lo! it closed for ever, and the sorceress was
left to bellow forth her lamentable complaints to senseless stones.
Thus was St. George freed from the enchanted land, and taking with him
the six other champions of Christendom on their steeds, he mounted
Bayard and rode to the city of Coventry.
Here for nine months they abode, exercising themselves in all feats of
arms. So when spring returned they set forth, as knights errant, to seek
for foreign adventure.
And for thirty days and thirty nights they rode on, until, at the
beginning of a new month, they came to a great wide plain. Now in the
centre of this plain, where seven several ways met, there stood a great
brazen pillar, and here, with high heart and courage, they bade each
other farewell, and each took a separate road.
Hence, St. George, on his charger Bayard, rode till he reached the
seashore where lay a good ship bound for the land of Egypt. Taking
passage in her, after long journeying he arrived in that land when the
silent wings of night were outspread, and darkness brooded on all
things. Here, coming to a poor hermitage, he begged a night's lodging,
on which the hermit replied:
"Sir Knight of Merrie England--for I see her arms graven on thy
breastplate--thou hast come hither in an ill time, when those alive are
scarcely able to bury the dead by reason of the cruel destruction waged
by a terrible dragon, who ranges up and down the country by day and by
night. If he have not an innocent maiden to devour each day, he sends a
mortal plague amongst the people. And this has not ceased for twenty and
four years, so that there is left throughout the land but one maiden,
the beautiful Sâbia, daughter to the King. And to-morrow must she die,
unless some brave knight will slay the monster. To such will the King
give his daughter in marriage, and the crown of Egypt in due time."
"For crowns I care not," said St. George boldly, "but the beauteous
maiden shall not die. I will slay the monster."
So, rising at dawn of day, he buckled on his armour, laced his helmet,
and with the falchion Ascalon in his hand, bestrode Bayard, and rode
into the Valley of the Dragon. Now on the way he met a procession of old
women weeping and wailing, and in their midst the most beauteous damsel
he had ever seen. Moved by compassion he dismounted, and bowing low
before the lady entreated her to return to her father's palace, since he
was about to kill the dreaded dragon. Whereupon the beautiful Sâbia,
thanking him with smiles and tears, did as he requested, and he,
re-mounting, rode on his emprise.
Now, no sooner did the dragon catch sight of the brave Knight than its
leathern throat sent out a sound more terrible than thunder, and
weltering from its hideous den, it spread its burning wings and prepared
to assail its foe.
Its size and appearance might well have made the stoutest heart tremble.
From shoulder to tail ran full forty feet, its body was covered with
silver scales, its belly was as gold, and through its flaming wings the
blood ran thick and red.
So fierce was its onset, that at the very first encounter the Knight was
nigh felled to the ground; but recovering himself he gave the dragon
such a thrust with his spear that the latter shivered to a thousand
pieces; whereupon the furious monster smote him so violently with its
tail that both horse and rider were overthrown.
Now, by great good chance, St. George was flung under the shade of a
flowering orange tree, whose fragrance hath this virtue in it, that no
poisonous beast dare come within the compass of its branches. So there
the valiant knight had time to recover his senses, until with eager
courage he rose, and rushing to the combat, smote the burning dragon on
his burnished belly with his trusty sword Ascalon; and thereinafter
spouted out such black venom, as, falling on the armour of the Knight,
burst it in twain. And ill might it have fared with St. George of Merrie
England but for the orange tree, which once again gave him shelter under
its branches, where, seeing the issue of the fight was in the Hands of
the Most High, he knelt and prayed that such strength of body should be
given him as would enable him to prevail. Then with a bold and
courageous heart, he advanced again, and smote the fiery dragon under
one of his flaming wings, so that the weapon pierced the heart, and all
the grass around turned crimson with the blood that flowed from the
dying monster. So St. George of England cut off the dreadful head, and
hanging it on a truncheon made of the spear which at the beginning of
the combat had shivered against the beast's scaly back, he mounted his
steed Bayard, and proceeded to the palace of the King.
Now the King's name was Ptolemy, and when he saw that the dreaded dragon
was indeed slain, he gave orders for the city to be decorated. And he
sent a golden chariot with wheels of ebony and cushions of silk to bring
St. George to the palace, and commanded a hundred nobles dressed in
crimson velvet, and mounted on milk-white steeds richly caparisoned, to
escort him thither with all honour, while musicians walked before and
after, filling the air with sweetest sounds.
Now the beautiful Sâbia herself washed and dressed the weary Knight's
wounds, and gave him in sign of betrothal a diamond ring of purest
water. Then, after he had been invested by the King with the golden
spurs of knighthood and had been magnificently feasted, he retired to
rest his weariness, while the beautiful Sâbia from her balcony lulled
him to sleep with her golden lute.
So all seemed happiness; but alas! dark misfortune was at hand.
Almidor, the black King of Morocco, who had long wooed the Princess
Sâbia in vain, without having the courage to defend her, seeing that the
maiden had given her whole heart to her champion, resolved to compass
his destruction.
So, going to King Ptolemy, he told him--what was perchance true--namely,
that the beauteous Sâbia had promised St. George to become Christian,
and follow him to England. Now the thought of this so enraged the King
that, forgetting his debt of honour, he determined on an act of basest
treachery.
Telling St. George that his love and loyalty needed further trial, he
entrusted him with a message to the King of Persia, and forbade him
either to take with him his horse Bayard or his sword Ascalon; nor would
he even allow him to say farewell to his beloved Sâbia.
St. George then set forth sorrowfully, and surmounting many dangers,
reached the Court of the King of Persia in safety; but what was his
anger to find that the secret missive he bore contained nothing but an
earnest request to put the bearer of it to death. But he was helpless,
and when sentence had been passed upon him, he was thrown into a loathly
dungeon, clothed in base and servile weeds, and his arms strongly
fettered up to iron bolts, while the roars of the two hungry lions who
were to devour him ere long, deafened his ears. Now his rage and fury at
this black treachery was such that it gave him strength, and with mighty
effort he drew the staples that held his fetters; so being part free he
tore his long locks of amber-coloured hair from his head and wound them
round his arms instead of gauntlets. So prepared he rushed on the lions
when they were let loose upon him, and thrusting his arms down their
throats choked them, and thereinafter tearing out their very hearts,
held them up in triumph to the gaolers who stood by trembling with fear.
After this the King of Persia gave up the hopes of putting St. George to
death, and, doubling the bars of the dungeon, left him to languish
therein. And there the unhappy Knight remained for seven long years, his
thoughts full of his lost Princess; his only companions rats and mice
and creeping worms, his only food and drink bread made of the coarsest
bran and dirty water.
At last one day, in a dark corner of his dungeon, he found one of the
iron staples he had drawn in his rage and fury. It was half consumed
with rust, yet it was sufficient in his hands to open a passage through
the walls of his cell into the King's garden. It was the time of night
when all things are silent; but St. George, listening, heard the voices
of grooms in the stables; which, entering, he found two grooms
furnishing forth a horse against some business. Whereupon, taking the
staple with which he had redeemed himself from prison, he slew the
grooms, and mounting the palfrey rode boldly to the city gates, where he
told the watchman at the Bronze Tower that St. George having escaped
from the dungeon, he was in hot pursuit of him. Whereupon the gates were
thrown open, and St. George, clapping spurs to his horse, found himself
safe from pursuit before the first red beams of the sun shot up into the
sky.
Now, ere long, being most famished with hunger, he saw a tower set on a
high cliff, and riding thitherward determined to ask for food. But as he
neared the castle he saw a beauteous damsel in a blue and gold robe
seated disconsolate at a window. Whereupon, dismounting, he called aloud
to her:
"Lady! If thou hast sorrow of thine own, succour one also in distress,
and give me, a Christian Knight, now almost famished, one meal's meat."
To which she replied quickly:
"Sir Knight! Fly quickly as thou canst, for my lord is a mighty giant, a
follower of Mahomed, who hath sworn to destroy all Christians."
Hearing this St. George laughed loud and long. "Go tell him then, fair
dame," he cried, "that a Christian Knight waits at his door, and will
either satisfy his wants within his castle or slay the owner thereof."
Now the giant no sooner heard this valiant challenge than he rushed
forth to the combat, armed with a hugeous crowbar of iron. He was a
monstrous giant, deformed, with a huge head, bristled like any boar's,
with hot, glaring eyes and a mouth equalling a tiger's. At first sight
of him St. George gave himself up for lost, not so much for fear, but
for hunger and faintness of body. Still, commending himself to the Most
High, he also rushed to the combat with such poor arms as he had, and
with many a regret for the loss of his magic sword Ascalon. So they
fought till noon, when, just as the champion's strength was nigh
finished, the giant stumbled on the root of a tree, and St. George,
taking his chance, ran him through the mid-rib, so that he gasped and
died.
After which St. George entered the tower; whereat the beautiful lady,
freed from her terrible lord, set before him all manner of delicacies
and pure wine with which he sufficed his hunger, rested his weary body,
and refreshed his horse.
So, leaving the tower in the hands of the grateful lady, he went on his
way, coming ere long to the Enchanted Garden of the necromancer
Ormadine, where, embedded in the living rock, he saw a magic sword, the
like of which for beauty he had never seen, the belt being beset with
jaspers and sapphire stones, while the pommel was a globe of the purest
silver chased in gold with these verses:
  My magic will remain most firmly bound
  Till that a knight from the far north be found
  To pull this sword from out its bed of stone.
  Lo! when he comes wise Ormadine must fall.
  Farewell, my magic power, my spell, my all.
Seeing this St. George put his hand to the hilt, thinking to essay
pulling it out by strength; but lo! he drew it out with as much ease as
though it had hung by a thread of untwisted silk. And immediately every
door in the enchanted garden flew open, and the magician Ormadine
appeared, his hair standing on end; and he, after kissing the hand of
the champion, led him to a cave where a young man wrapped in a sheet of
gold lay sleeping, lulled by the songs of four beautiful maidens.
"The Knight whom thou seest here!" said the necromancer in a hollow
voice, "is none other than thy brother-in-arms, the Christian Champion
St. David of Wales. He also attempted to draw my sword but failed. Him
hast thou delivered from my enchantments since they come to an end."
Now, as he spoke, came such a rattling of the skies, such a lumbering of
the earth as never was, and in the twinkling of an eye the Enchanted
Garden and all in it vanished from view, leaving the Champion of Wales,
roused from his seven years' sleep, giving thanks to St. George, who
greeted his ancient comrade heartily.
After this St. George of Merrie England travelled far and travelled
fast, with many adventures by the way, to Egypt where he had left his
beloved Princess Sâbia. But, learning to his great grief and horror from
the same hermit he had met on first landing, that, despite her denials,
her father, King Ptolemy, had consented to Almidor the black King of
Morocco carrying her off as one of his many wives, he turned his steps
towards Tripoli, the capital of Morocco; for he was determined at all
costs to gain a sight of the dear Princess from whom he had been so
cruelly rent.
To this end he borrowed an old cloak of the hermit, and, disguised as a
beggar, gained admittance to the gate of the Women's Palace, where were
gathered together on their knees many others, poor, frail, infirm.
And when he asked them wherefore they knelt, they answered:
"Because good Queen Sâbia succours us that we may pray for the safety of
St. George of England, to whom she gave her heart."
Now when St. George heard this his own heart was like to break for very
joy, and he could scarce keep on his knees when, lovely as ever, but
with her face pale and sad and wan from long distress, the Princess
Sâbia appeared clothed in deep mourning.
In silence she handed an alms to each beggar in turn; but when she came
to St. George she started and laid her hand on her heart. Then she said
softly:
"Rise up, Sir Beggar! Thou art too like one who rescued me from death,
for it to be meet for thee to kneel before me!"
Then St. George rising, and bowing low, said quietly: "Peerless lady!
Lo! I am that very knight to whom thou did'st condescend to give this."
And with this he slipped the diamond ring she had given him on her
finger. But she looked not at it, but at him, with love in her eyes.
Then he told her of her father's base treachery and Almidor's part in
it, so that her anger grew hot and she cried:
"Waste no more time in talk. I remain no longer in this detested place.
Ere Almidor returns from hunting we shall have escaped."
[Illustration: When she came to St. George she started and laid her
hand on her heart]
So she led St. George to the armoury, where he found his trusty sword
Ascalon, and to the stable, where his swift steed Bayard stood ready
caparisoned.
Then, when her brave Knight had mounted, and she, putting her foot on
his, had leapt like a bird behind him, St. George touched the proud
beast lightly with his spurs, and, like an arrow from a bow, Bayard
carried them together over city and plain, through woods and forests,
across rivers, and mountains, and valleys, until they reached the Land
of Greece.
And here they found the whole country in festivity over the marriage of
the King. Now amongst other entertainments was a grand tournament, the
news of which had spread through the world. And to it had come all the
other Six Champions of Christendom; so St. George arriving made the
Seventh. And many of the champions had with them the fair lady they had
rescued. St. Denys of France brought beautiful Eglantine, St. James of
Spain sweet Celestine, while noble Rosalind accompanied St. Anthony of
Italy. St. David of Wales, after his seven years' sleep, came full of
eager desire for adventure. St. Patrick of Ireland, ever courteous,
brought all the six Swan-princesses who, in gratitude, had been seeking
their deliverer St. Andrew of Scotland; since he, leaving all worldly
things, had chosen to fight for the faith.
So all these brave knights and fair ladies joined in the joyful
jousting, and each of the Seven Champions was in turn Chief Challenger
for a day.
Now in the midst of all the merriment appeared a hundred heralds from a
hundred different parts of the Paynim world, declaring war to the death
against all Christians.
Whereupon the Seven Champions agreed that each should return to his
native land to place his dearest lady in safety, and gather together an
army, and that six months later they should meet, and, joining as one
legion, go forth to fight for Christendom.
And this was done. So, having chosen St. George as Chief General, they
marched on Tripoli with the cry:
  "For Christendom we fight,
   For Christendom we die."
Here the wicked Almidor fell in single combat with St. George, to the
great delight of his subjects, who begged the Champion to be King in his
stead. To this he consented, and, after he was crowned, the Christian
host went on towards Egypt where King Ptolemy, in despair of vanquishing
such stalwart knights, threw himself down from the battlements of the
palace and was killed. Whereupon, in recognition of the chivalry and
courtesy of the Christian Champions, the nobles offered the Crown to one
of their number, and they with acclaim chose St. George of Merrie
England.
Thence the Christian host journeyed to Persia, where a fearsome battle
raged for seven days, during which two hundred thousand pagans were
slain, beside many who were drowned in attempting to escape. Thus they
were compelled to yield, the Emperor himself happening into the hands of
St. George, and six other viceroys into the hands of the six other
Champions.
And these were most mercifully and honourably entreated after they had
promised to govern Persia after Christian rules. Now the Emperor, having
a heart fraught with despite and tyranny, conspired against them, and
engaged a wicked wizard named Osmond to so beguile six of the Champions
that they gave up fighting, and lived an easy slothful life. But St.
George would not be beguiled; neither would he consent to the
enchantment of his brothers; and he so roused them that they never
sheathed their swords nor unlocked their armour till the wicked Emperor
and his viceroys were thrown into that very dungeon in which St. George
had languished for seven long years.
Whereupon St. George took upon himself the government of Persia, and
gave the six other Champions the six viceroyalties.
So, attired in a beautiful green robe, richly embroidered, over which
was flung a scarlet mantle bordered with white fur and decorated with
ornaments of pure gold, he took his seat on the throne which was
supported by elephants of translucent alabaster. And the Heralds at
arms, amid the shouting of the people, cried:
"Long live St. George of Merrie England, Emperor of Morocco, King of
Egypt, and Sultan of Persia!"
Now, after that he had established good and just laws to such effect
that innumerable companies of pagans flocked to become Christians, St.
George, leaving the Government in the hands of his trusted counsellors,
took truce with the world and returned to England, where, at Coventry,
he lived for many years with the Egyptian Princess Sâbia, who bore him
three stalwart sons. So here endeth the tale of St. George of Merrie
England, first and greatest of the Seven Champions.
THE STORY OF THE THREE BEARS
Once upon a time there were three Bears, who lived together in a house
of their own, in a wood. One of them was a Little Wee Bear, and one was
a Middle-sized Bear, and the other was a Great Big Bear. They had each a
bowl for their porridge; a little bowl for the Little Wee Bear; and a
middle-sized bowl for the Middle-sized Bear; and a great bowl for the
Great Big Bear. And they had each a chair to sit in; a little chair for
the Little Wee Bear; and a middle-sized chair for the Middle-sized Bear;
and a great chair for the Great Big Bear. And they had each a bed to
sleep in; a little bed for the Little Wee Bear; and a middle-sized bed
for the Middle-sized Bear; and a great bed for the Great Big Bear.
One day, after they had made the porridge for their breakfast, and
poured it into their porridge-bowls, they walked out into the wood while
the porridge was cooling, that they might not burn their mouths by
beginning too soon, for they were polite, well-brought-up Bears. And
while they were away a little girl called Goldilocks, who lived at the
other side of the wood and had been sent on an errand by her mother,
passed by the house, and looked in at the window. And then she peeped in
at the keyhole, for she was not at all a well-brought-up little girl.
Then seeing nobody in the house she lifted the latch. The door was not
fastened, because the Bears were good Bears, who did nobody any harm,
and never suspected that anybody would harm them. So Goldilocks opened
the door and went in; and well pleased was she when she saw the porridge
on the table. If she had been a well-brought-up little girl she would
have waited till the Bears came home, and then, perhaps, they would have
asked her to breakfast; for they were good Bears--a little rough or so,
as the manner of Bears is, but for all that very good-natured and
hospitable. But she was an impudent, rude little girl, and so she set
about helping herself.
First she tasted the porridge of the Great Big Bear, and that was too
hot for her. Next she tasted the porridge of the Middle-sized Bear, but
that was too cold for her. And then she went to the porridge of the
Little Wee Bear, and tasted it, and that was neither too hot nor too
cold, but just right, and she liked it so well that she ate it all up,
every bit!
Then Goldilocks, who was tired, for she had been catching butterflies
instead of running on her errand, sate down in the chair of the Great
Big Bear, but that was too hard for her. And then she sate down in the
chair of the Middle-sized Bear, and that was too soft for her. But when
she sat down in the chair of the Little Wee Bear, that was neither too
hard nor too soft, but just right. So she seated herself in it, and
there she sate till the bottom of the chair came out, and down she came,
plump upon the ground; and that made her very cross, for she was a
bad-tempered little girl.
Now, being determined to rest, Goldilocks went upstairs into the
bedchamber in which the Three Bears slept. And first she lay down upon
the bed of the Great Big Bear, but that was too high at the head for
her. And next she lay down upon the bed of the Middle-sized Bear, and
that was too high at the foot for her. And then she lay down upon the
bed of the Little Wee Bear, and that was neither too high at the head
nor at the foot, but just right. So she covered herself up comfortably,
and lay there till she fell fast asleep.
By this time the Three Bears thought their porridge would be cool enough
for them to eat it properly; so they came home to breakfast. Now
careless Goldilocks had left the spoon of the Great Big Bear standing in
his porridge.
                "SOMEBODY HAS BEEN AT MY PORRIDGE!"
said the Great Big Bear in his great, rough, gruff voice.
Then the Middle-sized Bear looked at his porridge and saw the spoon was
standing in it too.
said the Middle-sized Bear in his middle-sized voice.
Then the Little Wee Bear looked at his, and there was the spoon in the
porridge-bowl, but the porridge was all gone!
      "SOMEBODY HAS BEEN AT MY PORRIDGE, AND HAS EATEN IT ALL UP!"
said the Little Wee Bear in his little wee voice.
Upon this the Three Bears, seeing that some one had entered their house,
and eaten up the Little Wee Bear's breakfast, began to look about them.
Now the careless Goldilocks had not put the hard cushion straight when
she rose from the chair of the Great Big Bear.
                "SOMEBODY HAS BEEN SITTING IN MY CHAIR!"
And the careless Goldilocks had squatted down the soft cushion of the
Middle-sized Bear.
      "SOMEBODY HAS BEEN SITTING IN MY CHAIR, AND HAS SATE THE BOTTOM
       THROUGH!"
Then the Three Bears thought they had better make further search in case
it was a burglar, so they went upstairs into their bedchamber. Now
Goldilocks had pulled the pillow of the Great Big Bear out of its place.
                "SOMEBODY HAS BEEN LYING IN MY BED!"
And Goldilocks had pulled the bolster of the Middle-sized Bear out of
its place.
But when the Little Wee Bear came to look at his bed, there was the
bolster in its place!
And the pillow was in its place upon the bolster!
And upon the pillow----?
There was Goldilocks's yellow head--which was not in its place, for she
had no business there.
      "SOMEBODY HAS BEEN LYING IN MY BED,--AND HERE SHE IS STILL!"
[Illustration: "Somebody has been lying in my bed,--and here she is!"]
Now Goldilocks had heard in her sleep the great, rough, gruff voice of
the Great Big Bear; but she was so fast asleep that it was no more to
her than the roaring of wind, or the rumbling of thunder. And she had
heard the middle-sized voice of the Middle-sized Bear, but it was only
as if she had heard some one speaking in a dream. But when she heard the
little wee voice of the Little Wee Bear, it was so sharp, and so shrill,
that it awakened her at once. Up she started, and when she saw the Three
Bears on one side of the bed, she tumbled herself out at the other, and
ran to the window. Now the window was open, because the Bears, like
good, tidy Bears, as they were, always opened their bedchamber window
when they got up in the morning. So naughty, frightened little
Goldilocks jumped; and whether she broke her neck in the fall, or ran
into the wood and was lost there, or found her way out of the wood and
got whipped for being a bad girl and playing truant, no one can say. But
the Three Bears never saw anything more of her.
[Illustration: "Somebody has been at my porridge, and has eaten it all
up!"]
TOM-TIT-TOT
Once upon a time there was a woman and she baked five pies. But when
they came out of the oven they were over-baked, and the crust was far
too hard to eat. So she said to her daughter:
"Daughter," says she, "put them pies on to the shelf and leave 'em there
awhile. Surely they'll come again in time."
By that, you know, she meant that they would become softer; but her
daughter said to herself, "If Mother says the pies will come again, why
shouldn't I eat these now?" So, having good, young teeth, she set to
work and ate the lot, first and last.
Now when supper-time came the woman said to her daughter, "Go you and
get one of the pies. They are sure to have come again by now."
Then the girl went and looked, but of course there was nothing but the
empty dishes.
So back she came and said, "No, Mother, they ain't come again."
"Not one o' them?" asked the mother, taken aback like.
"Not one o' them," says the daughter, quite confident.
"Well," says the mother, "come again, or not come again, I will have one
of them pies for my supper."
"But you can't," says the daughter. "How can you if they ain't come? And
they ain't, as sure's sure."
"But I can," says the mother, getting angry. "Go you at once, child, and
bring me the best on them. My teeth must just tackle it."
"Best or worst is all one," answered the daughter, quite sulky, "for
I've ate the lot, so you can't have one till it comes again--so there!"
Well, the mother she bounced up to see; but half an eye told her there
was nothing save the empty dishes; so she was dished up herself and done
for.
So, having no supper, she sate her down on the doorstep, and, bringing
out her distaff, began to spin. And as she span she sang:
  "My daughter ha' ate five pies to-day,
   My daughter ha' ate five pies to-day,
   My daughter ha' ate five pies to-day,"
for, see you, she was quite flabbergasted and fair astonished.
Now the King of that country happened to be coming down the street, and
he heard the song going on and on, but could not quite make out the
words. So he stopped his horse, and asked:
"What is that you are singing, my good woman?"
[Illustration: "What is that you are singing, my good woman?"]
Now the mother, though horrified at her daughter's appetite, did not
want other folk, leastwise the King, to know about it, so she sang
instead:
  "My daughter ha' spun five skeins to-day,
   My daughter ha' spun five skeins to-day,
   My daughter ha' spun five skeins to-day."
"Five skeins!" cried the King. "By my garter and my crown, I never heard
tell of any one who could do that! Look you here, I have been searching
for a maiden to wife, and your daughter who can spin five skeins a day
is the very one for me. Only, mind you, though for eleven months of the
year she shall be Queen indeed, and have all she likes to eat, all the
gowns she likes to get, all the company she likes to keep, and
everything her heart desires, in the twelfth month she must set to work
and spin five skeins a day, and if she does not she must die. Come! is
it a bargain?"
So the mother agreed. She thought what a grand marriage it was for her
daughter. And as for the five skeins? Time enough to bother about them
when the year came round. There was many a slip between cup and lip,
and, likely as not, the King would have forgotten all about it by then.
Anyhow, her daughter would be Queen for eleven months. So they were
married, and for eleven months the bride was happy as happy could be.
She had everything she liked to eat, and all the gowns she liked to get,
all the company she cared to keep, and everything her heart desired. And
her husband the King was kind as kind could be. But in the tenth month
she began to think of those five skeins and wonder if the King
remembered. And in the eleventh month she began to dream about them as
well. But ne'er a word did the King, her husband, say about them; so she
hoped he had forgotten.
But on the very last day of the eleventh month, the King, her husband,
led her into a room she had never set eyes on before. It had one window,
and there was nothing in it but a stool and a spinning-wheel.
"Now, my dear," he said quite kind like, "you will be shut in here
to-morrow morning with some victuals and some flax, and if by evening
you have not spun five skeins, your head will come off."
Well she was fair frightened, for she had always been such a gatless
thoughtless girl that she had never learnt to spin at all. So what she
was to do on the morrow she could not tell; for, see you, she had no one
to help her; for, of course, now she was Queen, her mother didn't live
nigh her. So she just locked the door of her room, sat down on a stool,
and cried and cried and cried until her pretty eyes were all red.
Now as she sate sobbing and crying she heard a queer little noise at the
bottom of the door. At first she thought it was a mouse. Then she
thought it must be something knocking.
So she upped and opened the door and what did she see? Why! a small,
little, black Thing with a long tail that whisked round and round ever
so fast.
"What are you crying for?" said that Thing, making a bow, and twirling
its tail so fast that she could scarcely see it.
"What's that to you?" said she, shrinking a bit, for that Thing was very
queer like.
"Don't look at my tail if you're frightened," says That, smirking. "Look
at my toes. Ain't they beautiful?"
And sure enough That had on buckled shoes with high heels and big bows,
ever so smart.
[Illustration: A small, little, black Thing with a long tail]
So she kind of forgot about the tail, and wasn't so frightened, and
when That asked her again why she was crying, she upped and said, "It
won't do no good if I do."
"You don't know that," says That, twirling its tail faster and faster,
and sticking out its toes. "Come, tell me, there's a good girl."
"Well," says she, "it can't do any harm if it doesn't do good." So she
dried her pretty eyes and told That all about the pies, and the skeins,
and everything from first to last.
And then that little, black Thing nearly burst with laughing. "If that
is all, it's easy mended!" it says. "I'll come to your window every
morning, take the flax, and bring it back spun into five skeins at
night. Come! shall it be a bargain?"
Now she, for all she was so gatless and thoughtless, said, cautious
like:
"But what is your pay?"
Then That twirled its tail so fast you couldn't see it, and stuck out
its beautiful toes, and smirked and looked out of the corners of its
eyes. "I will give you three guesses every night to guess my name, and
if you haven't guessed it before the month is up, why"--and That twirled
its tail faster and stuck out its toes further, and smirked and
sniggered more than ever--"you shall be mine, my beauty."
Three guesses every night for a whole month! She felt sure she would be
able for so much; and there was no other way out of the business, so she
just said, "Yes! I agree!"
And lor! how That twirled its tail, and bowed, and smirked, and stuck
out its beautiful toes.
Well, the very next day her husband led her to the strange room again,
and there was the day's food, and a spinning-wheel and a great bundle of
flax.
"There you are, my dear," says he as polite as polite. "And remember! if
there are not five whole skeins to-night, I fear your head will come
off!"
At that she began to tremble, and after he had gone away and locked the
door, she was just thinking of a good cry, when she heard a queer
knocking at the window. She upped at once and opened it, and sure enough
there was the small, little, black Thing sitting on the window-ledge,
dangling its beautiful toes and twirling its tail so that you could
scarcely see it.
"Good-morning, my beauty," says That. "Come! hand over the flax, sharp,
there's a good girl."
So she gave That the flax and shut the window and, you may be sure, ate
her victuals, for, as you know, she had a good appetite, and the King,
her husband, had promised to give her everything she liked to eat. So
she ate to her heart's content, and when evening came and she heard that
queer knocking at the window again, she upped and opened it, and there
was the small, little, black Thing with five spun skeins on his arm!
And it twirled its tail faster than ever, and stuck out its beautiful
toes, and bowed and smirked and gave her the five skeins.
Then That said, "And now, my beauty, what is That's name?"
And she answered quite easy like:
"That is Bill."
"No, it ain't," says That, and twirled its tail.
"Then That is Ned," says she.
"No, it ain't," says That, and twirled its tail faster.
"Well," says she a bit more thoughtful, "That is Mark."
"No, it ain't," says That, and laughs and laughs and laughs, and twirls
its tail so as you couldn't see it, as away it flew.
Well, when the King, her husband, came in, he was fine and pleased to
see the five skeins all ready for him, for he was fond of his pretty
"I shall not have to order your head off, my dear," says he. "And I hope
all the other days will pass as happily." Then he said good-night and
locked the door and left her.
But next morning they brought her fresh flax and even more delicious
foods. And the small, little, black Thing came knocking at the window
and stuck out its beautiful toes and twirled its tail faster and faster,
and took away the bundle of flax and brought it back all spun into five
skeins by evening.
Then That made her guess three times what That's name was; but she could
not guess right, and That laughed and laughed and laughed as it flew
away.
Now every morning and evening the same thing happened, and every evening
she had her three guesses; but she never guessed right. And every day
the small, little, black Thing laughed louder and louder and smirked
more and more, and looked at her quite maliceful out of the corners of
its eyes until she began to get frightened, and instead of eating all
the fine foods left for her, spent the day in trying to think of names
to say. But she never hit upon the right one.
So it came to the last day of the month but one, and when the small,
little, black Thing arrived in the evening with the five skeins of flax
all ready spun, it could hardly say for smirking:
"Ain't you got That's name yet?"
So says she--for she had been reading her Bible:
"Is That Nicodemus?"
"No, it ain't," says That, and twirled its tail faster than you could
"Is That Samuel?" says she all of a flutter.
"No, it ain't, my beauty," chuckles That, looking maliceful.
"Well--is That Methuselah?" says she, inclined to cry.
Then That just fixes her with eyes like a coal a-fire, and says, "No, it
ain't that neither, so there is only to-morrow night and then you'll be
mine, my beauty."
And away the small, little, black Thing flew, its tail twirling and
whisking so fast that you couldn't see it.
Well, she felt so bad she couldn't even cry; but she heard the King, her
husband, coming to the door, so she made bold to be cheerful, and tried
to smile when he said, "Well done, wife! Five skeins again! I shall not
have to order your head off after all, my dear, of that I'm quite sure,
so let us enjoy ourselves." Then he bade the servants bring supper, and
a stool for him to sit beside his Queen, and down they sat, lover-like,
side by side.
But the poor Queen could eat nothing; she could not forget the small,
little, black Thing. And the King hadn't eaten but a mouthful or two
when he began to laugh, and he laughed so long and so loud that at last
the poor Queen, all lackadaisical as she was, said:
"Why do you laugh so?"
"At something I saw to-day, my love," says the King. "I was out
a-hunting, and by chance I came to a place I'd never been in before. It
was in a wood, and there was an old chalk-pit there, and out of the
chalk-pit there came a queer kind of a sort of a humming, humming noise.
So I got off my hobby to see what made it, and went quite quiet to the
edge of the pit and looked down. And what do you think I saw? The
funniest, queerest, smallest, little, black Thing you ever set eyes
upon. And it had a little spinning-wheel and it was spinning away for
dear life, but the wheel didn't go so fast as its tail, and that span
round and round--ho-ho-ha-ha!--you never saw the like. And its little
feet had buckled shoes and bows on them, and they went up and down in a
desperate hurry. And all the time that small, little, black Thing kept
bumming and booming away at these words:
  "Name me, name me not,
   Who'll guess it's Tom-Tit-Tot."
Well, when she heard these words the Queen nearly jumped out of her
skin for joy; but she managed to say nothing, but ate her supper quite
comfortably.
And she said no word when next morning the small, little, black Thing
came for the flax, though it looked so gleeful and maliceful that she
could hardly help laughing, knowing she had got the better of it. And
when night came and she heard that knocking against the window-panes,
she put on a wry face, and opened the window slowly as if she was
afraid. But that Thing was as bold as brass and came right inside,
grinning from ear to ear. And oh, my goodness! how That's tail was
twirling and whisking!
"Well, my beauty," says That, giving her the five skeins all ready spun,
"what's my name?"
Then she put down her lip, and says, tearful like,
"Is--is--That--Solomon?"
"No, it ain't," laughs That, smirking out of the corner of That's eye.
And the small, little, black Thing came further into the room.
So she tried again--and this time she seemed hardly able to speak for
fright.
"Well--is That--Zebedee?" she says.
"No, it ain't," cried the impet, full of glee. And it came quite close
and stretched out its little black hands to her, and O-oh, ITS
TAIL...!!!
"Take time, my beauty," says That, sort of jeering like, and its small,
little, black eyes seemed to eat her up. "Take time! Remember! next
guess and you're mine!" Well, she backed just a wee bit from it, for it
was just horrible to look at; but then she laughed out and pointed her
finger at it and said, says she:
          "Name me, name me not,
          Your name is
               Tom
                TIT
               TOT."
And you never heard such a shriek as that small, little, black Thing
gave out. Its tail dropped down straight, its feet all crumpled up, and
away That flew into the dark, and she never saw it no more.
And she lived happy ever after with her husband, the King.
[Illustration: Away That flew into the dark, and she never saw it no
more]
THE GOLDEN SNUFF-BOX
Once upon a time, and a very good time too, though it was not in my
time, nor your time, nor for the matter of that in any one's time, there
lived a man and a woman who had one son called Jack, and he was just
terribly fond of reading books. He read, and he read, and then, because
his parents lived in a lonely house in a lonely forest and he never saw
any other folk but his father and his mother, he became quite crazy to
go out into the world and see charming princesses and the like.
So one day he told his mother he must be off, and she called him an
air-brained addle-pate, but added that, as he was no use at home, he had
better go seek his fortune. Then she asked him if he would rather take a
small cake with her blessing to eat on his journey, or a large cake with
her curse? Now Jack was a very hungry lad, so he just up and said:
"A big cake, if you please, 'm."
So his mother made a great big cake, and when he started she just off to
the top of the house and cast malisons on him, till he got out of
sight. You see she had to do it, but after that she sate down and cried.
Well, Jack hadn't gone far till he came to a field where his father was
ploughing. Now the goodman was dreadfully put out when he found his son
was going away, and still more so when he heard he had chosen his
mother's malison. So he cast about what to do to put things straight,
and at last he drew out of his pocket a little golden snuff-box, and
gave it to the lad, saying:
"If ever you are in danger of sudden death you may open the box; but not
till then. It has been in our family for years and years; but, as we
have lived, father and son, quietly in the forest, none of us have ever
been in need of help--perhaps you may."
So Jack pocketed the golden snuff-box and went on his way.
Now, after a time, he grew very tired, and very hungry, for he had eaten
his big cake first thing, and night closed in on him so that he could
scarce see his way.
But at last he came to a large house and begged board and lodging at the
back door. Now Jack was a good-looking young fellow, so the maid-servant
at once called him in to the fireside and gave him plenty good meat and
bread and beer. And it so happened that while he was eating his supper
the master's gay young daughter came into the kitchen and saw him. So
she went to her father and said that there was the prettiest young
fellow she had ever seen in the back kitchen, and that if her father
loved her he would give the young man some employment. Now the
gentleman of the house was exceedingly fond of his gay young daughter,
and did not want to vex her; so he went into the back kitchen and
questioned Jack as to what he could do.
"Anything," said Jack gaily, meaning, of course, that he could do any
foolish bit of work about a house.
But the gentleman saw a way of pleasing his gay young daughter and
getting rid of the trouble of employing Jack; so he laughs and says, "If
you can do anything, my good lad," says he, "you had better do this. By
eight o'clock to-morrow morning you must have dug a lake four miles
round in front of my mansion, and on it there must be floating a whole
fleet of vessels. And they must range up in front of my mansion and fire
a salute of guns. And the very last shot must break the leg of the
four-post bed on which my daughter sleeps, for she is always late of a
morning!"
Well! Jack was terribly flabbergasted, but he faltered out:
"And if I don't do it?"
"Then," said the master of the house quite calmly, "your life will be
the forfeit."
So he bade the servants take Jack to a turret-room and lock the door on
Well! Jack sate on the side of his bed and tried to think things out,
but he felt as if he didn't know b from a battledore, so he decided to
think no more, and after saying his prayers he lay down and went to
sleep. And he did sleep! When he woke it was close on eight o'clock,
and he had only time to fly to the window and look out, when the great
clock on the tower began to whirr before it struck the hour. And there
was the lawn in front of the house all set with beds of roses and stocks
and marigolds! Well! all of a sudden he remembered the little golden
snuff-box.
"I'm near enough to death," quoth he to himself, as he drew it out and
opened it.
And no sooner had he opened it than out hopped three funny little red
men in red night-caps, rubbing their eyes and yawning; for, see you,
they had been locked up in the box for years, and years, and years.
"What do you want, Master?" they said between their yawns. But Jack
heard that clock a-whirring and knew he hadn't a moment to lose, so he
just gabbled off his orders. Then the clock began to strike, and the
little men flew out of the window, and suddenly
              Bang! bang! bang! bang! bang! bang!
went the guns, and the last one must have broken the leg of the
four-post bed, for there at the window was the gay young daughter in her
nightcap, gazing with astonishment at the lake four miles round, with
the fleet of vessels floating on it!
And so did Jack! He had never seen such a sight in his life, and he was
quite sorry when the three little red men disturbed him by flying in at
the window and scrambling into the golden snuff-box.
"Give us a little more time when you want us next, Master," they said
sulkily. Then they shut down the lid, and Jack could hear them yawning
inside as they settled down to sleep.
As you may imagine, the master of the house was fair astonished, while
as for the gay young daughter, she declared at once that she would never
marry any one else but the young man who could do such wonderful things;
the truth being that she and Jack had fallen in love with each other at
first sight.
But her father was cautious. "It is true, my dear," says he, "that the
young fellow seems a bully boy; but for aught we know it may be chance,
not skill, and he may have a broken feather in his wing. So we must try
him again."
Then he said to Jack, "My daughter must have a fine house to live in.
Therefore by to-morrow morning at eight o'clock there must be a
magnificent castle standing on twelve golden pillars in the middle of
the lake, and there must be a church beside it. And all things must be
ready for the bride, and at eight o'clock precisely a peal of bells from
the church must ring out for the wedding. If not you will have to
forfeit your life."
This time Jack intended to give the three little red men more time for
their task; but what with having enjoyed himself so much all day, and
having eaten so much good food, he overslept himself, so that the big
clock on the tower was whirring before it struck eight when he woke,
leapt out of bed, and rushed to the golden snuff-box. But he had
forgotten where he had put it, and so the clock had really begun to
strike before he found it under his pillow, opened it, and gabbled out
his orders. And then you never saw how the three little red men tumbled
over each other and yawned and stretched and made haste all at one time,
so that Jack thought his life would surely be forfeit. But just as the
clock struck its last chime, out rang a peal of merry bells, and there
was the Castle standing on twelve golden pillars and a church beside it
in the middle of the lake. And the Castle was all decorated for the
wedding, and there were crowds and crowds of servants and retainers, all
dressed in their Sunday best.
Never had Jack seen such a sight before; neither had the gay young
daughter who, of course, was looking out of the next window in her
nightcap. And she looked so pretty and so gay that Jack felt quite cross
when he had to step back to let the three little red men fly to their
golden snuff-box. But they were far crosser than he was, and mumbled and
grumbled at the hustle, so that Jack was quite glad when they shut the
box down and began to snore.
Well, of course, Jack and the gay young daughter were married, and were
as happy as the day is long; and Jack had fine clothes to wear, fine
food to eat, fine servants to wait on him, and as many fine friends as
he liked.
So he was in luck; but he had yet to learn that a mother's malison is
sure to bring misfortune some time or another.
Thus it happened that one day when he was going a-hunting with all the
ladies and gentlemen, Jack forgot to change the golden snuff-box (which
he always carried about with him for fear of accidents) from his
waistcoat pocket to that of his scarlet hunting-coat; so he left it
behind him. And what should happen but that the servant let it fall on
the ground when he was folding up the clothes, and the snuff-box flew
open and out popped the three little red men yawning and stretching.
Well! when they found out that they hadn't really been summoned, and
that there was no fear of death, they were in a towering temper and said
they had a great mind to fly away with the Castle, golden pillars and
On hearing this the servant pricked up his ears.
"Could you do that?" he asked.
"Could we?" they said, and they laughed loud. "Why, we can do anything."
Then the servant said ever so sharp, "Then move me this Castle and all
it contains right away over the sea where the master can't disturb us."
Now the little red men need not really have obeyed the order, but they
were so cross with Jack that hardly had the servant said the words
before the task was done; so when the hunting-party came back, lo and
behold! the Castle, and the church, and the golden pillars had all
disappeared!
At first all the rest set upon Jack for being a knave and a cheat; and,
in particular, his wife's father threatened to have at him for deceiving
the gay young daughter; but at last he agreed to let Jack have twelve
months and a day to find the Castle and bring it back.
So off Jack starts on a good horse with some money in his pocket.
And he travelled far and he travelled fast, and he travelled east and
west, north and south, over hills, and dales, and valleys, and
mountains, and woods, and sheepwalks, but never a sign of the missing
castle did he see. Now at last he came to the palace of the King of all
the Mice in the Wide World. And there was a little mousie in a fine
hauberk and a steel cap doing sentry at the front gate, and he was not
for letting Jack in until he had told his errand. And when Jack had told
it, he passed him on to the next mouse sentry at the inner gate; so by
degrees he reached the King's chamber, where he sate surrounded by mice
courtiers.
Now the King of the Mice received Jack very graciously, and said that he
himself knew nothing of the missing Castle, but, as he was King of all
the Mice in the whole world, it was possible that some of his subjects
might know more than he. So he ordered his chamberlain to command a
Grand Assembly for the next morning, and in the meantime he entertained
Jack right royally.
But the next morning, though there were brown mice, and black mice, and
grey mice, and white mice, and piebald mice, from all parts of the
world, they all answered with one breath:
"If it please your Majesty, we have not seen the missing Castle."
Then the King said, "You must go and ask my elder brother the King of
all the Frogs. He may be able to tell you. Leave your horse here and
take one of mine. It knows the way and will carry you safe."
So Jack set off on the King's horse, and as he passed the outer gate he
saw the little mouse sentry coming away, for its guard was up. Now Jack
was a kind-hearted lad, and he had saved some crumbs from his dinner in
order to recompense the little sentry for his kindness. So he put his
hand in his pocket and pulled out the crumbs.
"Here you are, mousekin," he said. "That's for your trouble!"
Then the mouse thanked him kindly and asked if he would take him along
to the King of the Frogs.
"Not I," says Jack. "I should get into trouble with your King."
But the mousekin insisted. "I may be of some use to you," it said. So it
ran up the horse's hind leg and up by its tail and hid in Jack's pocket.
And the horse set off at a hard gallop, for it didn't half like the
mouse running over it.
So at last Jack came to the palace of the King of all the Frogs, and
there at the front gate was a frog doing sentry in a fine coat of mail
and a brass helmet. And the frog sentry was for not letting Jack in; but
the mouse called out that they came from the King of all the Mice and
must be let in without delay. So they were taken to the King's chamber,
where he sate surrounded by frog courtiers in fine clothes; but alas!
he had heard nothing of the Castle on golden pillars, and though he
summoned all the frogs of all the world to a Grand Assembly next
morning, they all answered his question with:
  "Kro kro, Kro kro"
which every one knows stands for "No" in frog language.
So the King said to Jack, "There remains but one thing. You must go and
ask my eldest brother, the King of all the Birds. His subjects are
always on the wing, so mayhap they have seen something. Leave the horse
you are riding here, and take one of mine. It knows the way, and will
carry you safe."
So Jack set off, and being a kind-hearted lad he gave the frog sentry,
whom he met coming away from his guard, some crumbs he had saved from
his dinner. And the frog asked leave to go with him, and when Jack
refused to take him he just gave one hop on to the stirrup, and a second
hop on to the crupper, and the next hop he was in Jack's other pocket.
Then the horse galloped away like lightning, for it didn't like the
slimy frog coming down "plop" on its back.
Well, after a time, Jack came to the palace of the King of all the
Birds, and there at the front gate were a sparrow and a crow marching up
and down with matchlocks on their shoulders. Now at this Jack laughed
fit to split, and the mouse and the frog from his pockets called out:
"We come from the King! Sirrahs! Let us pass."
So that the sentries were right mazed, and let them pass in without more
ado.
But when they came to the King's chamber, where he sate surrounded by
all manner of birds, tomtits, wrens, cormorants, turtle-doves, and the
like, the King said he was sorry, but he had no news of the missing
Castle. And though he summoned all the birds of all the world to a Grand
Assembly next morning, not one of them had seen or heard tell of it.
So Jack was quite disconsolate till the King said, "But where is the
eagle? I don't see my eagle."
Then the Chamberlain--he was a tomtit--stepped forward with a bow and
"May it please your Majesty he is late."
"Late?" says the King in a fume. "Summon him at once."
So two larks flew up into the sky till they couldn't be seen and sang
ever so loud, till at last the eagle appeared all in a perspiration from
having flown so fast.
Then the King said, "Sirrah! Have you seen a missing Castle that stands
upon twelve pillars of gold?"
And the eagle blinked its eyes and said, "May it please your Majesty
that is where I've been."
Then everybody rejoiced exceedingly, and when the eagle had eaten a
whole calf so as to be strong enough for the journey, he spread his wide
wings, on which Jack stood, with the mouse in one pocket and the frog in
the other, and started to obey the King's order to take the owner back
to his missing Castle as quickly as possible.
And they flew over land and they flew over sea, until at last in the far
distance they saw the Castle standing on its twelve golden pillars. But
all the doors and windows were fast shut and barred, for, see you, the
servant-master who had run away with it had gone out for the day
a-hunting, and he always bolted doors and windows while he was absent
lest some one else should run away with it.
Then Jack was puzzled to think how he should get hold of the golden
snuff-box, until the little mouse said:
"Let me fetch it. There is always a mouse-hole in every castle, so I am
sure I shall be able to get in."
So it went off, and Jack waited on the eagle's wings in a fume; till at
last mousekin appeared.
"Have you got it?" shouted Jack, and the little mousie cried:
                             "Yes!"
So every one rejoiced exceedingly, and they set off back to the palace
of the King of all the Birds, where Jack had left his horse; for now
that he had the golden snuff-box safe he knew he could get the Castle
back whenever he chose to send the three little red men to fetch it. But
on the way over the sea, while Jack, who was dead tired with standing so
long, lay down between the eagle's wings and fell asleep, the mouse and
the eagle fell to quarrelling as to which of them had helped Jack the
most, and they quarrelled so much that at last they laid the case before
the frog. Then the frog, who made a very wise judge, said he must see
the whole affair from the very beginning; so the mouse brought out the
golden snuff-box from Jack's pocket, and began to relate where it had
been found and all about it. Now, at that very moment Jack awoke, kicked
out his leg, and plump went the golden snuff-box down to the very bottom
of the sea!
"I thought my turn would come," said the frog, and went plump in after
Well, they waited, and waited, and waited for three whole days and three
whole nights; but froggie never came up again, and they had just given
him up in despair when his nose showed above the water.
"Have you got it?" they shouted.
"No!" says he, with a great gasp.
"Then what do you want?" they cried in a rage.
"My breath," says froggie, and with that he sinks down again.
Well, they waited two days and two nights more, and at last up comes the
little frog with the golden snuff-box in its mouth.
Then they all rejoiced exceedingly, and the eagle flew ever so fast to
the palace of the King of the Birds.
But alas and alack-a-day! Jack's troubles were not ended; his mother's
malison was still bringing him ill-luck, for the King of the Birds flew
into a fearsome rage because Jack had not brought the Castle of the
golden pillars back with him. And he said that unless he saw it by eight
o'clock next morning Jack's head should come off as a cheat and a liar.
Then Jack being close to death opened the golden snuff-box, and out
tumbled the three little red men in their three little red caps. They
had recovered their tempers and were quite glad to be back with a master
who knew that they would only, as a rule, work under fear of death; for,
see you, the servant-master had been for ever disturbing their sleep
with opening the box to no purpose.
So before the clock struck eight next morning, there was the Castle on
its twelve golden pillars, and the King of the Birds was fine and
pleased, and let Jack take his horse and ride to the palace of the King
of the Frogs. But there exactly the same thing happened, and poor Jack
had to open the snuff-box again and order the Castle to come to the
palace of the King of the Frogs. At this the little red men were a wee
bit cross; but they said they supposed it could not be helped; so,
though they yawned, they brought the Castle all right, and Jack was
allowed to take his horse and go to the palace of the King of all the
Mice in the World. But here the same thing happened, and the little red
men tumbled out of the golden snuff-box in a real rage, and said fellows
might as well have no sleep at all! However, they did as they were
bidden; they brought the Castle of the golden pillars from the palace of
the King of the Frogs to the palace of the King of the Birds, and Jack
was allowed to take his own horse and ride home.
[Illustration: They brought the Castle of the golden pillars]
But the year and a day which he had been allowed was almost gone, and
even his gay young wife, after almost weeping her eyes out after her
handsome young husband, had given up Jack for lost; so every one was
astounded to see him, and not over-pleased either to see him come
without his Castle. Indeed his father-in-law swore with many oaths that
if it were not in its proper place by eight o'clock next morning Jack's
life should be forfeit.
Now this, of course, was exactly what Jack had wanted and intended from
the beginning; because when death was nigh he could open the golden
snuff-box and order about the little red men. But he had opened it so
often of late and they had become so cross that he was in a stew what to
do; whether to give them time to show their temper, or to hustle them
out of it. At last he decided to do half and half. So just as the hands
of the clock were at five minutes to eight he opened the box, and
stopped his ears!
Well! you never heard such a yawning, and scolding, and threatening, and
blustering. What did he mean by it? Why should he take four bites at one
cherry? If he was always in fear of death why didn't he die and have
done with it?
In the midst of all this the tower clock began to whirr--
"Gentlemen!" says Jack--he was really quaking with fear--"do as you are
told."
"For the last time," they shrieked. "We won't stay and serve a master
who thinks he is going to die every day."
And with that they flew out of the window.
                    AND THEY NEVER CAME BACK.
The golden snuff-box remained empty for evermore.
But when Jack looked out of window there was the Castle in the middle of
the lake on its twelve golden pillars, and there was his young wife ever
so pretty and gay in her nightcap looking out of the window too.
So they lived happily ever after.
TATTERCOATS
brought him the baby he swore that it might live or die as it liked, but
he would never look on its face as long as it lived.
river to the great sea. Meanwhile, his granddaughter grew up with no one
to care for her, or clothe her; only the old nurse, when no one was by,
would sometimes give her a dish of scraps from the kitchen, or a torn
petticoat from the rag-bag; while the other servants of the palace would
drive her from the house with blows and mocking words, calling her
"Tattercoats," and pointing to her bare feet and shoulders, till she ran
away, crying, to hide among the bushes.
So she grew up, with little to eat or to wear, spending her days out of
doors, her only companion a crippled gooseherd, who fed his flock of
geese on the common. And this gooseherd was a queer, merry little chap,
and when she was hungry, or cold, or tired, he would play to her so
gaily on his little pipe, that she forgot all her troubles, and would
fall to dancing with his flock of noisy geese for partners.
Now one day people told each other that the King was travelling through
the land, and was to give a great ball to all the lords and ladies of
the country in the town near by, and that the Prince, his only son, was
to choose a wife from amongst the maidens in the company. In due time
one of the royal invitations to the ball was brought to the Palace by
the sea, and the servants carried it up to the old lord, who still sat
by his window, wrapped in his long white hair and weeping into the
little river that was fed by his tears.
prisoner, and he could not move. And then he sent them for rich clothes,
horse, with gold and silk, that he might ride to meet the King; but he
quite forgot he had a granddaughter to take to the ball.
Meanwhile Tattercoats sat by the kitchen-door weeping, because she could
not go to see the grand doings. And when the old nurse heard her crying
she went to the Lord of the Palace, and begged him to take his
granddaughter with him to the King's ball.
But he only frowned and told her to be silent; while the servants
laughed and said, "Tattercoats is happy in her rags, playing with the
gooseherd! Let her be--it is all she is fit for."
had run away to tell her friend the gooseherd how unhappy she was
Now when the gooseherd had listened to her story, he bade her cheer up,
rags and bare feet he played a note or two upon his pipe, so gay and
she well knew, the gooseherd had taken her by the hand, and she and he,
"Even cripples can dance when they choose," said the gooseherd.
Before they had gone very far a handsome young man, splendidly dressed,
riding up, stopped to ask the way to the castle where the King was
staying, and when he found that they too were going thither, he got off
"You seem merry folk," he said, "and will be good company."
"Good company, indeed," said the gooseherd, and played a new tune that
was not a dance.
It was a curious tune, and it made the strange young man stare and stare
and stare at Tattercoats till he couldn't see her rags--till he
couldn't, to tell the truth, see anything but her beautiful face.
Then he said, "You are the most beautiful maiden in the world. Will you
marry me?"
Then the gooseherd smiled to himself, and played sweeter than ever.
But Tattercoats laughed. "Not I," said she; "you would be finely put to
shame, and so would I be, if you took a goose-girl for your wife! Go and
ask one of the great ladies you will see to-night at the King's ball,
and do not flout poor Tattercoats."
the young man fell in love; till at last he begged her to come that
night at twelve to the King's ball, just as she was, with the gooseherd
and his geese, in her torn petticoat and bare feet, and see if he
wouldn't dance with her before the King and the lords and ladies, and
present her to them all, as his dear and honoured bride.
[Illustration: Tattercoats dancing while the gooseherd pipes]
Now at first Tattercoats said she would not; but the gooseherd said,
"Take fortune when it comes, little one."
the clock struck twelve, Tattercoats and the gooseherd, followed by his
flock of noisy geese, hissing and swaying their heads, entered at the
great doors, and walked straight up the ball-room, while on either side
the ladies whispered, the lords laughed, and the King seated at the far
end stared in amazement.
But as they came in front of the throne Tattercoats' lover rose from
"Father!" he said--for it was the Prince himself--"I have made my
Before he had finished speaking, the gooseherd had put his pipe to his
lips and played a few notes that sounded like a bird singing far off in
the woods; and as he played Tattercoats' rags were changed to shining
hair, and the flock of geese behind her became a crowd of dainty pages,
And as the King rose to greet her as his daughter the trumpets sounded
So there he still sits by his window,--if you could only see him, as you
may some day--weeping more bitterly than ever. And his white hair has
bound him to the stones, and the river of his tears runs away to the
great sea.
THE THREE FEATHERS
Once upon a time there lived a girl who was wooed and married by a man
she never saw; for he came a-courting her after nightfall, and when they
were married he never came home till it was dark, and always left before
dawn.
Still he was good and kind to her, giving her everything her heart could
desire, so she was well content for a while. But, after a bit, some of
her friends, doubtless full of envy for her good luck, began to whisper
that the unseen husband must have something dreadful the matter with him
which made him averse to being seen.
Now from the very beginning the girl had wondered why her lover did not
come a-courting her as other girls' lovers came, openly and by day, and
though, at first, she paid no heed to her neighbours' nods and winks,
she began at last to think there might be something in what they said.
So she determined to see for herself, and one night when she heard her
husband come into her room, she lit her candle suddenly and saw him.
And, lo and behold! he was handsome as handsome; beautiful enough to
make every woman in the world fall in love with him on the spot. But
even as she got her glimpse of him, he changed into a big brown bird
which looked at her with eyes full of anger and blame.
"Because you have done this faithless thing," it said, "you will see me
no more, unless for seven long years and a day you serve for me
faithfully."
And she cried with tears and sobs, "I will serve seven times seven years
and a day if you will only come back. Tell me what I am to do."
Then the bird-husband said, "I will place you in service, and there you
must remain and do good work for seven years and a day, and you must
listen to no man who may seek to beguile you to leave that service. If
you do I will never return."
To this the girl agreed, and the bird, spreading its broad brown wings,
carried her to a big mansion.
"Here they need a laundry-maid," said the bird-husband. "Go in, ask to
see the mistress, and say you will do the work; but remember you must do
it for seven years and a day."
"But I cannot do it for seven days," answered the girl. "I cannot wash
or iron."
"That matters nothing," replied the bird. "All you have to do is to
pluck three feathers from under my wing close to my heart, and these
feathers will do your bidding whatever it may be. You will only have to
put them on your hand, and say, 'By virtue of these three feathers from
over my true love's heart may this be done,' and it will be done."
So the girl plucked three feathers from under the bird's wing, and after
that the bird flew away.
Then the girl did as she was bidden, and the lady of the house engaged
her for the place. And never was such a quick laundress; for, see you,
she had only to go into the wash-house, bolt the door and close the
shutters, so that no one should see what she was at; then she would out
with the three feathers and say, "By virtue of these three feathers from
over my true love's heart may the copper be lit, the clothes sorted,
washed, boiled, dried, folded, mangled, ironed," and lo! there they came
tumbling on to the table, clean and white, quite ready to be put away.
So her mistress set great store by her and said there never was such a
good laundry-maid. Thus four years passed and there was no talk of her
leaving. But the other servants grew jealous of her, all the more so,
because, being a very pretty girl, all the men-servants fell in love
with her and wanted to marry her.
But she would have none of them, because she was always waiting and
longing for the day when her bird-husband would come back to her in
man's form.
Now one of the men who wanted her was the stout butler, and one day as
he was coming back from the cider-house he chanced to stop by the
laundry, and he heard a voice say, "By virtue of these three feathers
from over my true love's heart may the copper be lit, the clothes
sorted, boiled, dried, folded, mangled, and ironed."
He thought this very queer, so he peeped through the keyhole. And there
was the girl sitting at her ease in a chair, while all the clothes came
flying to the table ready and fit to put away.
Well, that night he went to the girl and said that if she turned up her
nose at him and his proposal any longer, he would up and tell the
mistress that her fine laundress was nothing but a witch; and then, even
if she were not burnt alive, she would lose her place.
Now the girl was in great distress what to do, since if she were not
faithful to her bird-husband, or if she failed to serve her seven years
and a day in one service, he would alike fail to return; so she made an
excuse by saying she could think of no one who did not give her enough
money to satisfy her.
At this the stout butler laughed. "Money?" said he. "I have seventy
pounds laid by with master. Won't that satisfy thee?"
"Happen it would," she replied.
So the very next night the butler came to her with the seventy pounds in
golden sovereigns, and she held out her apron and took them, saying she
was content; for she had thought of a plan. Now as they were going
upstairs together she stopped and said:
"Mr. Butler, excuse me for a minute. I have left the shutters of the
wash-house open, and I must shut them, or they will be banging all night
and disturb master and missus!"
Now though the butler was stout and beginning to grow old, he was
anxious to seem young and gallant; so he said at once:
"Excuse me, my beauty, you shall not go. I will go and shut them. I
shan't be a moment!"
So off he set, and no sooner had he gone than she out with her three
feathers, and putting them on her hand, said in a hurry:
"By virtue of the three feathers from over my true love's heart may the
shutters never cease banging till morning, and may Mr. Butler's hands be
busy trying to shut them."
And so it happened.
Mr. Butler shut the shutters, but--bru-u-u! there they were hanging open
again. Then he shut them once more, and this time they hit him on the
face as they flew open. Yet he couldn't stop; he had to go on. So there
he was the whole livelong night. Such a cursing, and banging, and
swearing, and shutting, never was, until dawn came, and, too tired to be
really angry, he crept back to his bed, resolving that come what might
he would not tell what had happened to him and thus get the laugh on
him. So he kept his own counsel, and the girl kept the seventy pounds,
and laughed in her sleeve at her would-be lover.
Now after a time the coachman, a spruce middle-aged man, who had long
wanted to marry the clever, pretty laundry-maid, going to the pump to
get water for his horses overheard her giving orders to the three
feathers, and peeping through the keyhole as the butler had done, saw
her sitting at her ease in a chair while the clothes, all washed and
ironed and mangled, came flying to the table.
So, just as the butler had done, he went to the girl and said, "I have
you now, my pretty. Don't dare to turn up your nose at me, for if you do
I'll tell mistress you are a witch."
Then the girl said quite calmly, "I look on none who has no money."
"If that is all," replied the coachman, "I have forty pounds laid by
with master. That I'll bring and ask for payment to-morrow night."
So when the night came the girl held out her apron for the money, and as
she was going up the stairs she stopped suddenly and said, "Goody me!
I've left my clothes on the line. Stop a bit till I fetch them in."
Now the coachman was really a very polite fellow, so he said at once:
"Let me go. It is a cold, windy night and you'll be catching your
death."
So off he went, and the girl out with her feathers and said:
clothes slash and blow about till dawn, and may Mr. Coachman not be able
to gather them up or take his hand from the job."
And when she had said this she went quietly to bed, for she knew what
would happen. And sure enough it did. Never was such a night as Mr.
Coachman spent with the wet clothes flittering and fluttering about his
ears, and the sheets wrapping him into a bundle, and tripping him up,
while the towels slashed at his legs. But though he smarted all over he
had to go on till dawn came, and then a very weary, woebegone coachman
couldn't even creep away to his bed, for he had to feed and water his
horses! And he, also, kept his own counsel for fear of the laugh going
against him; so the clever laundry-maid put the forty pounds with the
seventy in her box, and went on with her work gaily. But after a time
the footman, who was quite an honest lad and truly in love, going by the
laundry peeped through the keyhole to get a glimpse of his dearest dear,
and what should he see but her sitting at her ease in a chair, and the
clothes coming all ready folded and ironed on to the table.
Now when he saw this he was greatly troubled. So he went to his master
and drew out all his savings; and then he went to the girl and told her
that he would have to tell the mistress what he had seen, unless she
consented to marry him.
"You see," he said, "I have been with master this while back, and have
saved up this bit, and you have been here this long while back and must
have saved as well. So let us put the two together and make a home, or
else stay on at service as pleases you."
Well, she tried to put him off; but he insisted so much that at last she
"James! there's a dear, run down to the cellar and fetch me a drop of
brandy. You've made me feel so queer!" And when he had gone she out
with her three feathers, and said, "By virtue of the three feathers from
over my true love's heart may James not be able to pour the brandy
straight, except down his throat."
Well! so it happened. Try as he would, James could not get the brandy
into the glass. It splashed a few drops into it, then it trickled over
his hand, and fell on the floor. And so it went on and on till he grew
so tired that he thought he needed a dram himself. So he tossed off the
few drops and began again; but he fared no better. So he took another
little drain, and went on, and on, and on, till he got quite fuddled.
And who should come down into the cellar but his master to know what the
smell of brandy meant!
Now James the footman was truthful as well as honest, so he told the
master how he had come down to get the sick laundry-maid a drop of
brandy, but that his hand had shaken so that he could not pour it out,
and it had fallen on the ground, and that the smell of it had got to his
"A likely tale," said the master, and beat James soundly.
Then the master went to the mistress, his wife, and said: "Send away
that laundry-maid of yours. Something has come over my men. They have
all drawn out their savings as if they were going to be married, yet
they don't leave, and I believe that girl is at the bottom of it."
But his wife would not hear of the laundry-maid being blamed; she was
the best servant in the house, and worth all the rest of them put
together; it was his men who were at fault. So they quarrelled over it;
but in the end the master gave in, and after this there was peace, since
the mistress bade the girl keep herself to herself, and none of the men
would say ought of what had happened for fear of the laughter of the
other servants.
So it went on until one day when the master was going a-driving, the
coach was at the door, and the footman was standing to hold the coach
open, and the butler on the steps all ready, when who should pass
through the yard, so saucy and bright with a great basket of clean
clothes, but the laundry-maid. And the sight of her was too much for
James, the footman, who began to blub.
"She is a wicked girl," he said. "She got all my savings, and got me a
good thrashing besides."
Then the coachman grew bold. "Did she?" he said. "That was nothing to
what she served me." So he up and told all about the wet clothes and the
awful job he had had the livelong night. Now the butler on the steps
swelled with rage until he nearly burst, and at last he out with his
night of banging shutters.
"And one," he said, "hit me on the nose."
This settled the three men, and they agreed to tell their master the
moment he came out, and get the girl sent about her business. Now the
laundry-maid had sharp ears and had paused behind a door to listen; so
when she heard this she knew she must do something to stop it. So she
out with her three feathers and said, "By virtue of the three feathers
from over my true love's heart may there be striving as to who suffered
most between the men so that they get into the pond for a ducking."
Well! no sooner had she said the words than the three men began
disputing as to which of them had been served the worst; then James up
and hit the stout butler, giving him a black eye, and the fat butler
fell upon James and pommelled him hard, while the coachman scrambled
from his box and belaboured them both, and the laundry-maid stood by
laughing.
So out comes the master, but none of them would listen, and each wanted
to be heard, and fought, and shoved, and pommelled away until they
shoved each other into the pond, and all got a fine ducking.
Then the master asked the girl what it was all about, and she said:
"They all wanted to tell a story against me because I won't marry them,
and one said his was the best, and the next said his was the best, so
they fell a-quarrelling as to which was the likeliest story to get me
into trouble. But they are well punished, so there is no need to do
Then the master went to his wife and said, "You are right. That
laundry-maid of yours is a very wise girl."
So the butler and the coachman and James had nothing to do but look
sheepish and hold their tongues, and the laundry-maid went on with her
duties without further trouble.
Then when the seven years and a day were over, who should drive up to
the door in a fine gilded coach but the bird-husband restored to his
shape as a handsome young man. And he carried the laundry-maid off to be
his wife again, and her master and mistress were so pleased at her good
fortune that they ordered all the other servants to stand on the steps
and give her good luck. So as she passed the butler she put a bag with
seventy pounds in it into his hand and said sweetly, "That is to
recompense you for shutting the shutters."
And when she passed the coachman she put a bag with forty pounds into
his hand and said, "That is your reward for bringing in the clothes."
But when she passed the footman she gave him a bag with a hundred pounds
in it, and laughed, saying, "That is for the drop of brandy you never
brought me!"
So she drove off with her handsome husband, and lived happy ever after.
LAZY JACK
Once upon a time there was a boy whose name was Jack, and he lived with
his mother on a common. They were very poor, and the old woman got her
living by spinning, but Jack was so lazy that he would do nothing but
bask in the sun in the hot weather, and sit by the corner of the hearth
in the winter-time. So they called him Lazy Jack. His mother could not
get him to do anything for her, and at last told him, one Monday, that
if he did not begin to work for his porridge she would turn him out to
get his living as he could.
This roused Jack, and he went out and hired himself for the next day to
a neighbouring farmer for a penny; but as he was coming home, never
having had any money before, he lost it in passing over a brook.
"You stupid boy," said his mother, "you should have put it in your
pocket."
"I'll do so another time," replied Jack.
Well, the next day, Jack went out again and hired himself to a
cowkeeper, who gave him a jar of milk for his day's work. Jack took the
jar and put it into the large pocket of his jacket, spilling it all,
long before he got home.
"Dear me!" said the old woman; "you should have carried it on your
head."
"I'll do so another time," said Jack.
So the following day, Jack hired himself again to a farmer, who agreed
to give him a cream cheese for his services. In the evening Jack took
the cheese, and went home with it on his head. By the time he got home
the cheese was all spoilt, part of it being lost, and part matted with
his hair.
"You stupid lout," said his mother, "you should have carried it very
carefully in your hands."
Now the next day, Lazy Jack again went out, and hired himself to a
baker, who would give him nothing for his work but a large tom-cat. Jack
took the cat, and began carrying it very carefully in his hands, but in
a short time pussy scratched him so much that he was compelled to let it
go.
When he got home, his mother said to him, "You silly fellow, you should
have tied it with a string, and dragged it along after you."
So on the following day, Jack hired himself to a butcher, who rewarded
him by the handsome present of a shoulder of mutton. Jack took the
mutton, tied it with a string, and trailed it along after him in the
dirt, so that by the time he had got home the meat was completely
spoilt. His mother was this time quite out of patience with him, for the
next day was Sunday, and she was obliged to do with cabbage for her
dinner.
[Illustration: Jack found it hard to hoist the donkey on his shoulders]
"You ninney-hammer," said she to her son, "you should have carried it on
your shoulder."
Well, on the Monday, Lazy Jack went once more and hired himself to a
cattle-keeper, who gave him a donkey for his trouble. Now though Jack
was strong he found it hard to hoist the donkey on his shoulders, but at
last he did it, and began walking home slowly with his prize. Now it so
happened that in the course of his journey he passed a house where a
rich man lived with his only daughter, a beautiful girl, who was deaf
and dumb. And she had never laughed in her life, and the doctors said
she would never speak till somebody made her laugh. So the father had
given out that any man who made her laugh would receive her hand in
marriage. Now this young lady happened to be looking out of the window
when Jack was passing by with the donkey on his shoulders; and the poor
beast with its legs sticking up in the air was kicking violently and
heehawing with all its might. Well, the sight was so comical that she
burst out into a great fit of laughter, and immediately recovered her
speech and hearing. Her father was overjoyed, and fulfilled his promise
by marrying her to Lazy Jack, who was thus made a rich gentleman. They
lived in a large house, and Jack's mother lived with them in great
happiness until she died.
[Illustration: The giant Cormoran was the terror of all the country-side]
JACK THE GIANT-KILLER
When good King Arthur reigned with Guinevere his Queen, there lived,
near the Land's End in Cornwall, a farmer who had one only son called
Jack. Now Jack was brisk and ready; of such a lively wit that none nor
nothing could worst him.
In those days, the Mount of St. Michael in Cornwall was the fastness of
a hugeous giant whose name was Cormoran.
He was full eighteen feet in height, some three yards about his middle,
of a grim fierce face, and he was the terror of all the country-side. He
lived in a cave amidst the rocky Mount, and when he desired victuals he
would wade across the tides to the mainland and furnish himself forth
with all that came in his way. The poor folk and the rich folk alike ran
out of their houses and hid themselves when they heard the swish-swash
of his big feet in the water; for if he saw them, he would think nothing
of broiling half-a-dozen or so of them for breakfast. As it was, he
seized their cattle by the score, carrying off half-a-dozen fat oxen on
his back at a time, and hanging sheep and pigs to his waistbelt like
bunches of dip-candles. Now this had gone on for long years, and the
poor folk of Cornwall were in despair, for none could put an end to the
giant Cormoran.
It so happened that one market day Jack, then quite a young lad, found
the town upside down over some new exploit of the giant's. Women were
weeping, men were cursing, and the magistrates were sitting in Council
over what was to be done. But none could suggest a plan. Then Jack,
blithe and gay, went up to the magistrates, and with a fine
courtesy--for he was ever polite--asked them what reward would be given
to him who killed the giant Cormoran.
"The treasures of the Giant's Cave," quoth they.
"Every whit of it?" quoth Jack, who was never to be done.
"To the last farthing," quoth they.
"Then will I undertake the task," said Jack, and forthwith set about the
business.
It was winter-time, and having got himself a horn, a pickaxe, and a
shovel, he went over to the Mount in the dark evening, set to work, and
before dawn he had dug a pit, no less than twenty-two feet deep and nigh
as big across. This he covered with long thin sticks and straw,
sprinkling a little loose mould over all to make it look like solid
ground. So, just as dawn was breaking, he planted himself fair and
square on the side of the pit that was farthest from the giant's cave,
raised the horn to his lips, and with full blast sounded:
                    "Tantivy! Tantivy! Tantivy!"
just as he would have done had he been hunting a fox.
Of course this woke the giant, who rushed in a rage out of his cave, and
seeing little Jack, fair and square blowing away at his horn, as calm
and cool as may be, he became still more angry, and made for the
disturber of his rest, bawling out, "I'll teach you to wake a giant, you
little whipper-snapper. You shall pay dearly for your tantivys, I'll
take you and broil you whole for break--"
He had only got as far as this when crash--he fell into the pit! So
there was a break indeed; such an one that it caused the very
foundations of the Mount to shake.
But Jack shook with laughter. "Ho, ho!" he cried, "how about breakfast
now, Sir Giant? Will you have me broiled or baked? And will no diet
serve you but poor little Jack? Faith! I've got you in Lob's pound now!
You're in the stocks for bad behaviour, and I'll plague you as I like.
Would I had rotten eggs; but this will do as well." And with that he up
with his pickaxe and dealt the giant Cormoran such a most weighty knock
on the very crown of his head, that he killed him on the spot.
Whereupon Jack calmly filled up the pit with earth again and went to
search the cave, where he found much treasure.
Now when the magistrates heard of Jack's great exploit, they proclaimed
that henceforth he should be known as--
JACK THE GIANT-KILLER.
And they presented him with a sword and belt, on which these words were
embroidered in gold:
  Here's the valiant Cornishman
  Who slew the giant Cormoran.
Of course the news of Jack's victory soon spread over all England, so
that another giant named Blunderbore who lived to the north, hearing of
it, vowed if ever he came across Jack he would be revenged upon him. Now
this giant Blunderbore was lord of an enchanted castle that stood in the
middle of a lonesome forest.
It so happened that Jack, about four months after he had killed
Cormoran, had occasion to journey into Wales, and on the road he passed
this forest. Weary with walking, and finding a pleasant fountain by the
wayside, he lay down to rest and was soon fast asleep.
Now the giant Blunderbore, coming to the well for water, found Jack
sleeping, and knew by the lines embroidered on his belt that here was
the far-famed giant-killer. Rejoiced at his luck, the giant, without
more ado, lifted Jack to his shoulder and began to carry him through the
wood to the enchanted castle.
But the rustling of the boughs awakened Jack, who, finding himself
already in the clutches of the giant, was terrified; nor was his alarm
decreased by seeing the courtyard of the castle all strewn with men's
bones.
"Yours will be with them ere long," said Blunderbore as he locked poor
Jack into an immense chamber above the castle gateway. It had a
high-pitched, beamed roof, and one window that looked down the road.
Here poor Jack was to stay while Blunderbore went to fetch his
brother-giant, who lived in the same wood, that he might share in the
Now, after a time, Jack, watching through the window, saw the two giants
tramping hastily down the road, eager for their dinner.
"Now," quoth Jack to himself, "my death or my deliverance is at hand."
For he had thought out a plan. In one corner of the room he had seen two
strong cords. These he took, and making a cunning noose at the end of
each, he hung them out of the window, and, as the giants were unlocking
the iron door of the gate, managed to slip them over their heads without
their noticing it. Then, quick as thought, he tied the other ends to a
beam, so that as the giants moved on the nooses tightened and throttled
them until they grew black in the face. Seeing this, Jack slid down the
ropes, and drawing his sword, slew them both.
So, taking the keys of the castle, he unlocked all the doors and set
free three beauteous ladies who, tied by the hair of their heads, he
found almost starved to death. "Sweet ladies," quoth Jack, kneeling on
one knee--for he was ever polite--"here are the keys of this enchanted
castle. I have destroyed the giant Blunderbore and his brutish brother,
and thus have restored to you your liberty. These keys should bring you
all else you require."
So saying he proceeded on his journey to Wales.
He travelled as fast as he could; perhaps too fast, for, losing his way,
he found himself benighted and far from any habitation. He wandered on
always in hopes, until on entering a narrow valley he came on a very
large, dreary-looking house standing alone. Being anxious for shelter he
went up to the door and knocked. You may imagine his surprise and alarm
when the summons was answered by a giant with two heads. But though this
monster's look was exceedingly fierce, his manners were quite polite;
the truth being that he was a Welsh giant, and as such double-faced and
smooth, given to gaining his malicious ends by a show of false
friendship.
So he welcomed Jack heartily in a strong Welsh accent, and prepared a
bedroom for him, where he was left with kind wishes for a good rest.
Jack, however, was too tired to sleep well, and as he lay awake, he
overheard his host muttering to himself in the next room. Having very
keen ears he was able to make out these words, or something like them:
  "Though here you lodge with me this night,
   You shall not see the morning light.
   My club shall dash your brains outright."
"Say'st thou so!" quoth Jack to himself, starting up at once, "So that
is your Welsh trick, is it? But I will be even with you." Then, leaving
his bed, he laid a big billet of wood among the blankets, and taking one
of these to keep himself warm, made himself snug in a corner of the
room, pretending to snore, so as to make Mr. Giant think he was asleep.
And sure enough, after a little time, in came the monster on tiptoe as
if treading on eggs, and carrying a big club. Then--
  WHACK! WHACK! WHACK!
Jack could hear the bed being belaboured until the Giant, thinking every
bone of his guest's skin must be broken, stole out of the room again;
whereupon Jack went calmly to bed once more and slept soundly! Next
morning the giant couldn't believe his eyes when he saw Jack coming down
the stairs fresh and hearty.
"Odds splutter hur nails!" he cried, astonished. "Did she sleep well?
Was there not nothing felt in the night?"
"Oh," replied Jack, laughing in his sleeve, "I think a rat did come and
give me two or three flaps of his tail."
[Illustration: Taking the keys of the castle, Jack unlocked all the doors]
[Illustration: "Odds splutter hur nails!" cried the giant, not to be
outdone. "Hur can do that hurself!"]
On this the giant was dumbfoundered, and led Jack to breakfast, bringing
him a bowl which held at least four gallons of hasty-pudding, and
bidding him, as a man of such mettle, eat the lot. Now Jack when
travelling wore under his cloak a leathern bag to carry his things
withal; so, quick as thought, he hitched this round in front with the
opening just under his chin; thus, as he ate, he could slip the best
part of the pudding into it without the giant's being any the wiser. So
they sate down to breakfast, the giant gobbling down his own measure of
hasty-pudding, while Jack made away with his.
"See," says crafty Jack when he had finished. "I'll show you a trick
worth two of yours," and with that he up with a carving-knife and,
ripping up the leathern bag, out fell all the hasty-pudding on the
floor!
"Odds splutter hur nails!" cried the giant, not to be outdone. "Hur can
do that hurself!" Whereupon he seized the carving-knife, and ripping
open his own belly fell down dead.
Thus was Jack quit of the Welsh giant.
Now it so happened that in those days, when gallant knights were always
seeking adventures, King Arthur's only son, a very valiant Prince,
begged of his father a large sum of money to enable him to journey to
Wales, and there strive to set free a certain beautiful lady who was
possessed by seven evil spirits. In vain the King denied him; so at last
he gave way and the Prince set out with two horses, one of which he
rode, the other laden with gold pieces. Now after some days' journey the
Prince came to a market-town in Wales where there was a great commotion.
On asking the reason for it he was told that, according to law, the
corpse of a very generous man had been arrested on its way to the grave,
because, in life, it had owed large sums to the money-lenders.
"That is a cruel law," said the young Prince. "Go, bury the dead in
peace, and let the creditors come to my lodgings; I will pay the debts
of the dead."
So the creditors came, but they were so numerous that by evening the
Prince had but twopence left for himself, and could not go further on
his journey.
Now it so happened that Jack the Giant-Killer on his way to Wales passed
through the town, and, hearing of the Prince's plight, was so taken with
his kindness and generosity that he determined to be the Prince's
servant. So this was agreed upon, and next morning, after Jack had paid
the reckoning with his last farthing, the two set out together. But as
they were leaving the town, an old woman ran after the Prince and called
out, "Justice! Justice! The dead man owed me twopence these seven years.
Pay me as well as the others."
And the Prince, kind and generous, put his hand to his pocket and gave
the old woman the twopence that was left to him. So now they had not a
penny between them, and when the sun grew low the Prince said:
"Jack! Since we have no money, how are we to get a night's lodging?"
Then Jack replied, "We shall do well enough, Master; for within two or
three miles of this place there lives a huge and monstrous giant with
three heads, who can fight four hundred men in armour and make them fly
from him like chaff before the wind."
"And what good will that be to us?" quoth the Prince. "He will for sure
chop us up in a mouthful."
"Nay," said Jack, laughing. "Let me go and prepare the way for you. By
all accounts this giant is a dolt. Mayhap I may manage better than
So the Prince remained where he was, and Jack pricked his steed at full
speed till he came to the giant's castle, at the gate of which he
knocked so loud that he made the neighbouring hills resound.
On this the giant roared from within in a voice like thunder:
"Who's there?"
Then said Jack as bold as brass, "None but your poor cousin Jack."
"Cousin Jack!" quoth the giant, astounded. "And what news with my poor
cousin Jack?" For, see you, he was quite taken aback; so Jack made haste
to reassure him.
"Dear coz, heavy news, God wot!"
"Heavy news," echoed the giant, half afraid. "God wot, no heavy news can
come to me. Have I not three heads? Can I not fight five hundred men in
armour? Can I not make them fly like chaff before the wind?"
"True," replied crafty Jack, "but I came to warn you because the great
King Arthur's son with a thousand men in armour is on his way to kill
At this the giant began to shiver and to shake. "Ah! Cousin Jack! Kind
cousin Jack! This is heavy news indeed," quoth he. "Tell me, what am I
to do?"
[Illustration: "Ah! Cousin Jack! Kind cousin Jack! This is heavy news
indeed"]
"Hide yourself in the vault," says crafty Jack, "and I will lock and
bolt and bar you in; and keep the key till the Prince has gone. So you
will be safe."
Then the giant made haste and ran down into the vault, and Jack locked,
and bolted, and barred him in. Then being thus secure, he went and
fetched his master, and the two made themselves heartily merry over what
the giant was to have had for supper, while the miserable monster
shivered and shook with fright in the underground vault.
Well, after a good night's rest Jack woke his master in early morn, and
having furnished him well with gold and silver from the giant's
treasure, bade him ride three miles forward on his journey. So when Jack
judged that the Prince was pretty well out of the smell of the giant,
he took the key and let his prisoner out. He was half dead with cold and
damp, but very grateful; and he begged Jack to let him know what he
would be given as a reward for saving the giant's life and castle from
destruction, and he should have it.
"You're very welcome," said Jack, who always had his eyes about him.
"All I want is the old coat and cap, together with the rusty old sword
and slippers which are at your bed-head."
When the giant heard this he sighed and shook his head. "You don't know
what you are asking," quoth he. "They are the most precious things I
possess, but as I have promised, you must have them. The coat will make
you invisible, the cap will tell you all you want to know, the sword
will cut asunder whatever you strike, and the slippers will take you
wherever you want to go in the twinkling of an eye!"
So Jack, overjoyed, rode away with the coat and cap, the sword and the
slippers, and soon overtook his master; and they rode on together until
they reached the castle where the beautiful lady lived whom the Prince
sought.
Now she was very beautiful, for all she was possessed of seven devils,
and when she heard the Prince sought her as a suitor, she smiled and
ordered a splendid banquet to be prepared for his reception. And she
sate on his right hand, and plied him with food and drink.
And when the repast was over she took out her own handkerchief and
wiped his lips gently, and said, with a smile:
"I have a task for you, my lord! You must show me that kerchief
to-morrow morning or lose your head."
And with that she put the handkerchief in her bosom and said,
"Good-night!"
The Prince was in despair, but Jack said nothing till his master was in
bed. Then he put on the old cap he had got from the giant, and lo! in a
minute he knew all that he wanted to know. So, in the dead of the night,
when the beautiful lady called on one of her familiar spirits to carry
her to Lucifer himself, Jack was beforehand with her, and putting on his
coat of darkness and his slippers of swiftness, was there as soon as she
was. And when she gave the handkerchief to the Devil, bidding him keep
it safe, and he put it away on a high shelf, Jack just up and nipped it
away in a trice!
So the next morning, when the beauteous enchanted lady looked to see the
Prince crestfallen, he just made a fine bow and presented her with the
handkerchief.
At first she was terribly disappointed, but, as the day drew on, she
ordered another and still more splendid repast to be got ready. And this
time, when the repast was over, she kissed the Prince full on the lips
and said:
"I have a task for you, my lover. Show me to-morrow morning the last
lips I kiss to-night or you lose your head."
Then the Prince, who by this time was head over ears in love, said
tenderly, "If you will kiss none but mine, I will." Now the beauteous
lady, for all she was possessed by seven devils, could not but see that
the Prince was a very handsome young man; so she blushed a little, and
"That is neither here nor there: you must show me them, or death is your
portion."
So the Prince went to his bed, sorrowful as before; but Jack put on the
cap of knowledge and knew in a moment all he wanted to know.
Thus when, in the dead of the night, the beauteous lady called on her
familiar spirit to take her to Lucifer himself, Jack in his coat of
darkness and his shoes of swiftness was there before her.
"Thou hast betrayed me once," said the beauteous lady to Lucifer,
frowning, "by letting go my handkerchief. Now will I give thee something
none can steal, and so best the Prince, King's son though he be."
With that she kissed the loathly demon full on the lips, and left him.
Whereupon Jack with one blow of the rusty sword of strength cut off
Lucifer's head, and, hiding it under his coat of darkness, brought it
back to his master.
Thus next morning when the beauteous lady, with malice in her beautiful
eyes, asked the Prince to show her the lips she had last kissed, he
pulled out the demon's head by the horns. On that the seven devils,
which possessed the poor lady, gave seven dreadful shrieks and left her.
Thus the enchantment being broken, she appeared in all her perfect
beauty and goodness.
So she and the Prince were married the very next morning. After which
they journeyed back to the court of King Arthur, where Jack the
Giant-Killer, for his many exploits, was made one of the Knights of the
Round Table.
This, however, did not satisfy our hero, who was soon on the road again
searching for giants. Now he had not gone far when he came upon one,
seated on a huge block of timber near the entrance to a dark cave. He
was a most terrific giant. His goggle eyes were as coals of fire, his
countenance was grim and gruesome; his cheeks, like huge flitches of
bacon, were covered with a stubbly beard, the bristles of which
resembled rods of iron wire, while the locks of hair that fell on his
brawny shoulders showed like curled snakes or hissing adders. He held a
knotted iron club, and breathed so heavily you could hear him a mile
away. Nothing daunted by this fearsome sight, Jack alighted from his
horse and, putting on his coat of darkness, went close up to the giant
and said softly: "Hullo! is that you? It will not be long before I have
you fast by your beard."
[Illustration: Seated on a huge block of timber near the entrance to a
dark cave]
So saying he made a cut with the sword of strength at the giant's head,
but, somehow, missing his aim, cut off the nose instead, clean as a
whistle! My goodness! How the giant roared! It was like claps of
thunder, and he began to lay about him with the knotted iron club, like
one possessed. But Jack in his coat of darkness easily dodged the
blows, and running in behind, drove the sword up to the hilt into the
giant's back, so that he fell stone dead.
Jack then cut off the head and sent it to King Arthur by a waggoner whom
he hired for the purpose. After which he began to search the giant's
cave to find his treasure. He passed through many windings and turnings
until he came to a huge hall paved and roofed with freestone. At the
upper end of this was an immense fireplace where hung an iron cauldron,
the like of which, for size, Jack had never seen before. It was boiling
and gave out a savoury steam; while beside it, on the right hand, stood
a big massive table set out with huge platters and mugs. Here it was
that the giants used to dine. Going a little further he came upon a
sort of window barred with iron, and looking within beheld a vast number
of miserable captives.
"Alas! Alack!" they cried on seeing him. "Art come, young man, to join
us in this dreadful prison?"
"That depends," quoth Jack: "but first tell me wherefore you are thus
held imprisoned?"
"Through no fault," they cried at once. "We are captives of the cruel
giants and are kept here and well nourished until such time as the
monsters desire a feast. Then they choose the fattest and sup off them."
On hearing this Jack straightway unlocked the door of the prison and set
the poor fellows free. Then, searching the giants' coffers, he divided
the gold and silver equally amongst the captives as some redress for
their sufferings, and taking them to a neighbouring castle gave them a
right good feast.
Now as they were all making merry over their deliverance, and praising
Jack's prowess, a messenger arrived to say that one Thunderdell, a huge
giant with two heads, having heard of the death of his kinsman, was on
his way from the northern dales to be revenged, and was already within a
mile or two of the castle, the country folk with their flocks and herds
flying before him like chaff before the wind.
[Illustration: On his way ... to be revenged]
Now the castle with its gardens stood on a small island that was
surrounded by a moat twenty feet wide and thirty feet deep, having very
steep sides. And this moat was spanned by a drawbridge. This, without a
moment's delay, Jack ordered should be sawn on both sides at the middle,
so as to only leave one plank uncut over which he in his invisible coat
of darkness passed swiftly to meet his enemy, bearing in his hand the
wonderful sword of strength.
Now though the giant could not, of course, see Jack, he could smell him,
for giants have keen noses. Therefore Thunderdell cried out in a voice
like his name:
  "Fee, fi, fo, fum!
   I smell the blood of an Englishman.
   Be he alive, or be he dead,
   I'll grind his bones to make my bread!"
[Illustration: The country folk flying before him like chaff before the
wind]
"Is that so?" quoth Jack, cheerful as ever. "Then art thou a monstrous
miller for sure!"
On this the giant, peering round everywhere for a glimpse of his foe,
shouted out:
"Art thou, indeed, the villain who hath killed so many of my kinsmen?
Then, indeed, will I tear thee to pieces with my teeth, suck thy blood,
and grind thy bones to powder."
"Thou'lt have to catch me first," quoth Jack, laughing, and throwing off
his coat of darkness and putting on his slippers of swiftness, he began
nimbly to lead the giant a pretty dance, he leaping and doubling light
as a feather, the monster following heavily like a walking tower, so
that the very foundations of the earth seemed to shake at every step.
At this game the onlookers nearly split their sides with laughter, until
Jack, judging there had been enough of it, made for the drawbridge, ran
neatly over the single plank, and reaching the other side waited in
teasing fashion for his adversary.
On came the giant at full speed, foaming at the mouth with rage, and
flourishing his club. But when he came to the middle of the bridge his
great weight, of course, broke the plank, and there he was fallen
headlong into the moat, rolling and wallowing like a whale, plunging
from place to place, yet unable to get out and be revenged.
The spectators greeted his efforts with roars of laughter, and Jack
himself was at first too overcome with merriment to do more than scoff.
At last, however, he went for a rope, cast it over the giant's two
heads, so, with the help of a team of horses, drew them shorewards,
where two blows from the sword of strength settled the matter.
After some time spent in mirth and pastimes, Jack began once more to
grow restless, and taking leave of his companions set out for fresh
adventures.
He travelled far and fast, through woods, and vales, and hills, till at
last he came, late at night, on a lonesome house set at the foot of a
high mountain. Knocking at the door, it was opened by an old man whose
head was white as snow.
"Father," said Jack, ever courteous, "can you lodge a benighted
traveller?"
"Ay, that will I, and welcome to my poor cottage," replied the old man.
Whereupon Jack came in, and after supper they sate together chatting in
friendly fashion. Then it was that the old man, seeing by Jack's belt
that he was the famous Giant-Killer, spoke in this wise:
"My son! You are the great conqueror of evil monsters. Now close by
there lives one well worthy of your prowess. On the top of yonder high
hill is an enchanted castle kept by a giant named Galligantua, who, by
the help of a wicked old magician, inveigles many beautiful ladies and
valiant knights into the castle, where they are transformed into all
sorts of birds and beasts, yea, even into fishes and insects. There they
live pitiably in confinement; but most of all do I grieve for a duke's
daughter whom they kidnapped in her father's garden, bringing her hither
in a burning chariot drawn by fiery dragons. Her form is that of a white
hind; and though many valiant knights have tried their utmost to break
the spell and work her deliverance, none have succeeded; for, see you,
at the entrance to the castle are two dreadful griffins who destroy
every one who attempts to pass them by."
Now Jack bethought him of the coat of darkness which had served him so
well before, and he put on the cap of knowledge, and in an instant he
knew what had to be done. Then the very next morning, at dawn-time, Jack
arose and put on his invisible coat and his slippers of swiftness. And
in the twinkling of an eye there he was on the top of the mountain! And
there were the two griffins guarding the castle gates--horrible
creatures with forked tails and tongues. But they could not see him
because of the coat of darkness, so he passed them by unharmed.
And hung to the doors of the gateway he found a golden trumpet on a
silver chain, and beneath it was engraved in red lettering:
  Whoever shall this trumpet blow
  Will cause the giant's overthrow.
  The black enchantment he will break,
  And gladness out of sadness make.
No sooner had Jack read these words than he put the horn to his lips and
blew a loud
                "Tantivy! Tantivy! Tantivy!"
Now at the very first note the castle trembled to its vast foundations,
and before he had finished the measure, both the giant and the magician
were biting their thumbs and tearing their hair, knowing that their
wickedness must now come to an end. But the giant showed fight and took
up his club to defend himself; whereupon Jack, with one clean cut of the
sword of strength, severed his head from his body, and would doubtless
have done the same to the magician, but that the latter was a coward,
and, calling up a whirlwind, was swept away by it into the air, nor
has he ever been seen or heard of since. The enchantments being thus
broken, all the valiant knights and beautiful ladies, who had been
transformed into birds and beasts and fishes and reptiles and insects,
returned to their proper shapes, including the duke's daughter, who,
from being a white hind, showed as the most beauteous maiden upon whom
the sun ever shone. Now, no sooner had this occurred than the whole
castle vanished away in a cloud of smoke, and from that moment giants
vanished also from the land.
[Illustration: The giant Galligantua and the wicked old magician
transform the duke's daughter into a white hind]
So Jack, when he had presented the head of Galligantua to King Arthur,
together with all the lords and ladies he had delivered from
enchantment, found he had nothing more to do. As a reward for past
services, however, King Arthur bestowed the hand of the duke's daughter
upon honest Jack the Giant-Killer. So married they were, and the whole
kingdom was filled with joy at their wedding. Furthermore, the King
bestowed on Jack a noble castle with a magnificent estate belonging
thereto, whereon he, his lady, and their children lived in great joy and
content for the rest of their days.
[Illustration: Headpiece--The Three Sillies]
THE THREE SILLIES
Once upon a time, when folk were not so wise as they are nowadays, there
lived a farmer and his wife who had one daughter. And she, being a
pretty lass, was courted by the young squire when he came home from his
travels.
Now every evening he would stroll over from the Hall to see her and stop
to supper in the farm-house, and every evening the daughter would go
down into the cellar to draw the cider for supper.
So one evening when she had gone down to draw the cider and had turned
the tap as usual, she happened to look up at the ceiling, and there she
saw a big wooden mallet stuck in one of the beams.
It must have been there for ages and ages, for it was all covered with
cobwebs; but somehow or another she had never noticed it before, and at
once she began thinking how dangerous it was to have the mallet just
there.
"For," thought she, "supposing him and me was married, and supposing we
was to have a son, and supposing he were to grow up to be a man, and
supposing he were to come down to draw cider like as I'm doing, and
supposing the mallet were to fall on his head and kill him, how dreadful
it would be!"
And with that she put down the candle she was carrying and, seating
herself on a cask, began to cry. And she cried and cried and cried.
Now, upstairs, they began to wonder why she was so long drawing the
cider; so after a time her mother went down to the cellar to see what
had come to her, and found her, seated on the cask, crying ever so hard,
and the cider running all over the floor.
"Lawks a mercy me!" cried her mother, "whatever is the matter?"
"O mother!" says she between her sobs, "it's that horrid mallet.
Supposing him and me was married, and supposing we was to have a son,
and supposing he was to grow up to be a man, and supposing he was to
come down to draw cider like as I'm doing, and supposing the mallet were
to fall on his head and kill him, how dreadful it would be!"
"Dear heart!" said the mother, seating herself beside her daughter and
beginning to cry: "How dreadful it would be!"
So they both sat a-crying.
Now after a time, when they did not come back, the farmer began to
wonder what had happened, and going down to the cellar found them
seated side by side on the cask, crying hard, and the cider running all
over the floor.
"Zounds!" says he, "whatever is the matter?"
"Just look at that horrid mallet up there, father," moaned the mother.
"Supposing our daughter was to marry her sweetheart, and supposing they
was to have a son, and supposing he was to grow to man's estate, and
supposing he was to come down to draw cider like as we're doing, and
supposing that there mallet was to fall on his head and kill him, how
dreadful it would be!"
"Dreadful indeed!" said the father and, seating himself beside his wife
and daughter, started a-crying too.
Now upstairs the young squire wanted his supper; so at last he lost
patience and went down into the cellar to see for himself what they were
all after. And there he found them seated side by side on the cask
a-crying, with their feet all a-wash in cider, for the floor was fair
flooded. So the first thing he did was to run straight and turn off the
tap. Then he said:
"What are you three after, sitting there crying like babies, and letting
good cider run over the floor?"
Then they all three began with one voice, "Look at that horrid mallet!
Supposing you and me/she was married, and supposing we/you had a
son, and supposing he was to grow to man's estate, and supposing he was
to come down here to draw cider like as we be, and supposing that there
mallet was to fall down on his head and kill him, how dreadful it would
be!"
Then the young squire burst out a-laughing, and laughed till he was
tired. But at last he reached up to the old mallet and pulled it out,
and put it safe on the floor. And he shook his head and said, "I've
travelled far and I've travelled fast, but never have I met with three
such sillies as you three. Now I can't marry one of the three biggest
sillies in the world. So I shall start again on my travels, and if I can
find three bigger sillies than you three, then I'll come back and be
married--not otherwise."
So he wished them good-bye and started again on his travels, leaving
them all crying; this time because the marriage was off!
Well, the young man travelled far and he travelled fast, but never did
he find a bigger silly, until one day he came upon an old woman's
cottage that had some grass growing on the thatched roof.
And the old woman was trying her best to cudgel her cow into going up a
ladder to eat the grass. But the poor thing was afraid and durst not go.
Then the old woman tried coaxing, but it wouldn't go. You never saw such
a sight! The cow getting more and more flustered and obstinate, the old
woman getting hotter and hotter.
At last the young squire said, "It would be easier if you went up the
ladder, cut the grass, and threw it down for the cow to eat."
"A likely story that," says the old woman. "A cow can cut grass for
herself. And the foolish thing will be quite safe up there, for I'll tie
a rope round her neck, pass the rope down the chimney, and fasten
t'other end to my wrist, so as when I'm doing my bit o' washing, she
can't fall off the roof without my knowing it. So mind your own
business, young sir."
Well, after a while the old woman coaxed and codgered and bullied and
badgered the cow up the ladder, and when she got it on to the roof she
tied a rope round its neck, passed the rope down the chimney, and
fastened t'other end to her wrist. Then she went about her bit of
washing, and young squire he went on his way.
But he hadn't gone but a bit when he heard the awfullest hullabaloo. He
galloped back, and found that the cow had fallen off the roof and got
strangled by the rope round its neck, while the weight of the cow had
pulled the old woman by her wrist up the chimney, where she had got
stuck half-way and been smothered by the soot!
"That is one bigger silly," quoth the young squire as he journeyed on.
"So now for two more!"
He did not find any, however, till late one night he arrived at a little
inn. And the inn was so full that he had to share a room with another
traveller. Now his room-fellow proved quite a pleasant fellow, and they
forgathered, and each slept well in his bed.
But next morning, when they were dressing, what does the stranger do but
carefully hang his breeches on the knobs of the tallboy!
"What are you doing?" asks young squire.
"I'm putting on my breeches," says the stranger; and with that he goes
to the other end of the room, takes a little run, and tried to jump into
the breeches.
But he didn't succeed, so he took another run and another try, and
another and another and another, until he got quite hot and flustered,
as the old woman had got over her cow that wouldn't go up the ladder.
And all the time young squire was laughing fit to split, for never in
his life did he see anything so comical.
Then the stranger stopped a while and mopped his face with his
handkerchief, for he was all in a sweat. "It's very well laughing," says
he, "but breeches are the most awkwardest things to get into that ever
were. It takes me the best part of an hour every morning before I get
them on. How do you manage yours?"
Then young squire showed him, as well as he could for laughing, how to
put on his breeches, and the stranger was ever so grateful and said he
never should have thought of that way.
"So that," quoth young squire to himself, "is a second bigger silly."
But he travelled far and he travelled fast without finding the third,
until one bright night when the moon was shining right overhead he came
upon a village. And outside the village was a pond, and round about the
pond was a great crowd of villagers. And some had got rakes, and some
had got pitchforks, and some had got brooms. And they were as busy as
busy, shouting out, and raking, and forking, and sweeping away at the
pond.
"What is the matter?" cried young squire, jumping off his horse to help.
"Has any one fallen in?"
"Aye! Matter enough," says they. "Can't 'ee see moon's fallen into the
pond, an' we can't get her out nohow."
And with that they set to again raking, and forking, and sweeping away.
Then the young squire burst out laughing, told them they were fools for
their pains, and bade them look up over their heads where the moon was
riding broad and full. But they wouldn't, and they wouldn't believe that
what they saw in the water was only a reflection. And when he insisted
they began to abuse him roundly and threaten to duck him in the pond. So
he got on his horse again as quickly as he could, leaving them raking,
and forking, and sweeping away; and for all we know they may be at it
yet!
But the young squire said to himself, "There are many more sillies in
this world than I thought for; so I'll just go back and marry the
farmer's daughter. She is no sillier than the rest."
So they were married, and if they didn't live happy ever after, that has
nothing to do with the story of the three sillies.
[Illustration: Headpiece--The Golden Ball]
THE GOLDEN BALL
Once upon a time there lived two lasses, who were sisters, and as they
came from the fair they saw a right handsome young man standing at a
house door before them. They had never seen such a handsome young man
before. He had gold on his cap, gold on his finger, gold on his neck,
gold at his waist! And he had a golden ball in each hand. He gave a ball
to each lass, saying she was to keep it; but if she lost it, she was to
be hanged.
Now the youngest of the lasses lost her ball, and this is how. She was
by a park paling, and she was tossing her ball, and it went up, and up,
and up, till it went fair over the paling; and when she climbed to look
for it, the ball ran along the green grass, and it ran right forward to
the door of a house that stood there, and the ball went into the house
and she saw it no more.
So she was taken away to be hanged by the neck till she was dead,
because she had lost her ball.
But the lass had a sweetheart, and he said he would go and get the ball.
So he went to the park gate, but 'twas shut; then he climbed the
railing, and when he got to the top of it an old woman rose up out of
the ditch before him and said that if he wanted to get the ball he must
sleep three nights in the house: so he said he would.
Well! when it was evening, he went into the house, and looked everywhere
for the ball, but he could not find it, nor any one in the house at all;
but when night came on he thought he heard bogles moving about in the
courtyard; so he looked out o' window, and, sure enough, the yard was
full of them!
Presently he heard steps coming upstairs, so he hid behind the door, and
the lad, and looked around; but seeing nothing he went to the window and
bowed himself to look out; and as he bowed on his elbows to see the
bogles in the yard, the lad stepped behind him, and with one blow of his
sword he cut him in twain, so that the top part of him fell in the yard,
and the bottom part remained standing looking out of the window.
Well! there was a great cry from the bogles when they saw half the giant
come tumbling down to them, and they called out, "There comes half our
master; give us the other half."
Then the lad said, "It's no use of thee, thou pair of legs, standing
brother"; and he cast the lower part of the giant after the top part.
Next night the lad went to sleep in the house again, and this time a
second giant came in at the door, and as he came in the lad cut him in
twain; but the legs walked on to the fire and went straight up the
chimney.
"Go, get thee after thy legs," said the lad to the head, and he cast the
other half of the giant up the chimney.
Now the third night nothing happened, so the lad got into bed; but
before he went to sleep he heard the bogles striving under the bed, and
he wondered what they were at. So he peeped, and saw that they had the
ball there, and were playing with it, casting it to and fro.
Now after a time one of them thrust his leg out from under the bed, and
quick as anything the lad brings his sword down, and cuts it off. Then
another bogle thrust his arm out at t'other side of the bed, and in a
twinkling the lad cuts that off too. So it went on, till at last he had
maimed them all, and they all went off, crying and wailing, and forgot
the ball! Then the lad got out of bed, found the ball, and went off at
once to seek his true love.
[Illustration: He heard the bogles striving under the bed]
Now the lass had been taken to York to be hanged; she was brought out on
the scaffold, and the hangman said, "Now, lass, thou must hang by the
neck till thou be'st dead." But she cried out:
  "Stop, stop, I think I see my mother coming!
   O mother, hast thou brought my golden ball
      And come to set me free?"
And the mother answered:
  "I've neither brought thy golden ball
     Nor come to set thee free,
   But I have come to see thee hung
     Upon this gallows-tree."
  "Stop, stop, I think I see my father coming!
   O father, hast thou brought my golden ball
And the father answered:
again she sang her little verse, and the brother sang back the same
words. And so with her sister, her uncle, her aunt, and her cousin. But
they all said the same:
Then the hangman said, "I will stop no longer, thou'rt making game of
me. Thou must be hung at once."
But now, at long last, she saw her sweetheart coming through the crowd,
so she cried to him:
  "Stop, stop, I see my sweetheart coming!
   Sweetheart, hast thou brought my golden ball
Then her sweetheart held up her golden ball and cried:
  "Aye, I have brought to thee thy golden ball
     And come to set thee free;
   I have not come to see thee hung
So he took her home, then and there, and they lived happy ever after.
THE TWO SISTERS
Once upon a time there were two sisters who were as like each other as
two peas in a pod; but one was good, and the other was bad-tempered. Now
their father had no work, so the girls began to think of going to
service.
"I will go first and see what I can make of it," said the younger
sister, ever so cheerfully, "then you, sis, can follow if I have good
So she packed up a bundle, said good-bye, and started to find a place;
but no one in the town wanted a girl, and she went farther afield into
the country. And as she journeyed she came upon an oven in which a lot
of loaves were baking. Now as she passed, the loaves cried out with one
voice:
"Little girl! Little girl! Take us out! Please take us out! We have been
baking for seven years, and no one has come to take us out. Do take us
out or we shall soon be burnt!"
Then, being a kind, obliging little girl, she stopped, put down her
bundle, took out the bread, and went on her way saying:
"You will be more comfortable now."
After a time she came to a cow lowing beside an empty pail, and the cow
said to her:
"Little girl! Little girl! Milk me! Please milk me! Seven years have I
been waiting, but no one has come to milk me!"
So the kind girl stopped, put down her bundle, milked the cow into the
pail, and went on her way saying:
"Now you will be more comfortable."
By and by she came to an apple tree so laden with fruit that its
branches were nigh to break, and the apple tree called to her:
"Little girl! Little girl! Please shake my branches. The fruit is so
heavy I can't stand straight!"
Then the kind girl stopped, put down her bundle, and shook the branches
so that the apples fell off, and the tree could stand straight. Then she
went on her way saying:
So she journeyed on till she came to a house where an old witch-woman
lived. Now this witch-woman wanted a servant-maid, and promised good
wages. Therefore the girl agreed to stop with her and try how she liked
service. She had to sweep the floor, keep the house clean and tidy, the
fire bright and cheery. But there was one thing the witch-woman said she
must never do; and that was look up the chimney!
[Illustration: "Tree of mine! O Tree of mine! Have you seen my naughty
little maid?"]
"If you do," said the witch-woman, "something will fall down on you, and
you will come to a bad end." Well! the girl swept, and dusted, and
made up the fire; but ne'er a penny of wages did she see. Now the girl
wanted to go home as she did not like witch-service; for the witch used
to have boiled babies for supper, and bury the bones under some stones
in the garden. But she did not like to go home penniless; so she stayed
on, sweeping, and dusting, and doing her work, just as if she was
pleased. Then one day, as she was sweeping up the hearth, down tumbled
some soot, and, without remembering she was forbidden to look up the
chimney, she looked up to see where the soot came from. And, lo and
behold! a big bag of gold fell plump into her lap.
Now the witch happened to be out on one of her witch errands; so the
girl thought it a fine opportunity to be off home.
So she kilted up her petticoats and started to run home; but she had
only gone a little way when she heard the witch-woman coming after her
on her broomstick. Now the apple tree she had helped to stand straight
happened to be quite close; so she ran to it and cried:
  "Apple tree! Apple tree, hide me
   So the old witch can't find me,
   For if she does she'll pick my bones,
   And bury me under the garden stones."
Then the apple tree said, "Of course I will. You helped me to stand
straight, and one good turn deserves another."
So the apple tree hid her finely in its green branches; and when the
witch flew past saying:
  "Tree of mine! O Tree of mine!
   Have you seen my naughty little maid
   With a willy willy wag and a great big bag,
   She's stolen my money--all I had?"
The apple tree answered:
  "No, mother dear,
   Not for seven year!"
So the witch flew on the wrong way, and the girl got down, thanked the
tree politely, and started again. But just as she got to where the cow
was standing beside the pail, she heard the witch coming again, so she
ran to the cow and cried:
  "Cow! Cow, please hide me
   So the witch can't find me;
   If she does she'll pick my bones,
   And bury me under the garden stones!"
"Certainly I will," answered the cow. "Didn't you milk me and make me
comfortable? Hide yourself behind me and you'll be quite safe."
And when the witch flew by and called to the cow:
  "O Cow of mine! Cow of mine!
   Who stole my money--all that I had?"
She just said politely:
Then the old witch went on in the wrong direction, and the girl started
afresh on her way home; but just as she got to where the oven stood, she
heard that horrid old witch coming behind her again; so she ran as fast
as she could to the oven and cried:
  "O Oven! Oven! hide me
   So as the witch can't find me,
   And bury them under the garden stones."
Then the oven said, "I am afraid there is no room for you, as another
batch of bread is baking; but there is the baker--ask him."
So she asked the baker, and he said, "Of course I will. You saved my
last batch from being burnt; so run into the bakehouse, you will be
quite safe there, and I will settle the witch for you."
So she hid in the bakehouse, only just in time, for there was the old
witch calling angrily:
  "O Man of mine! Man of mine!
   Who's stole my money--all I had?"
Then the baker replied, "Look in the oven. She may be there."
And the witch alighted from her broomstick and peered into the oven: but
she could see no one.
"Creep in and look in the farthest corner," said the baker slyly, and
the witch crept in, when----
                           Bang!----
he shut the door in her face, and there she was roasting. And when she
came out with the bread she was all crisp and brown, and had to go home
as best she could and put cold cream all over her!
But the kind, obliging little girl got safe home with her bag of money.
Now the ill-tempered elder sister was very jealous of this good luck,
and determined to get a bag of gold for herself. So she in her turn
packed up a bundle and started to seek service by the same road. But
when she came to the oven, and the loaves begged her to take them out
because they had been baking seven years and were nigh to burning, she
tossed her head and said:
"A likely story indeed, that I should burn my fingers to save your
crusts. No, thank you!"
And with that she went on till she came across the cow standing waiting
to be milked beside the pail. But when the cow said:
"Little girl! Little girl! Milk me! Please milk me, I've waited seven
years to be milked----"
She only laughed and replied, "You may wait another seven years for all
I care. I'm not your dairymaid!"
And with that she went on till she came to the apple tree, all
overburdened by its fruit. But when it begged her to shake its branches,
she only giggled, and plucking one ripe apple, said:
"One is enough for me: you can keep the rest yourself." And with that
she went on munching the apple, till she came to the witch-woman's
Now the witch-woman, though she had got over being crisp and brown from
the oven, was dreadfully angry with all little maid-servants, and made
up her mind this one should not trick her. So for a long time she never
went out of the house; thus the ill-tempered sister never had a chance
of looking up the chimney, as she had meant to do at once. And she had
to dust, and clean, and brush, and sweep ever so hard, until she was
quite tired out.
But one day, when the witch-woman went into the garden to bury her
bones, she seized the moment, looked up the chimney, and, sure enough, a
bag of gold fell plump into her lap!
Well! she was off with it in a moment, and ran and ran till she came to
the apple tree, when she heard the witch-woman behind her. So she cried
as her sister had done:
   For if she does she'll break my bones,
   Or bury me under the garden stones."
But the apple tree said:
"No room here! I've too many apples."
So she had to run on; and when the witch-woman on her broomstick came
flying by and called:
  "O Tree of mine! Tree of mine!
   Have you seen a naughty little maid
   Who's stolen my money--all I had?"
The apple tree replied:
  "Yes, mother dear,
   She's gone down there."
Then the witch-woman went after her, caught her, gave her a thorough
good beating, took the bag of money away from her, and sent her home
without a penny payment for all her dusting, and sweeping, and brushing,
and cleaning.
[Illustration: Headpiece--The Laidly Worm]
THE LAIDLY WORM
In Bamborough Castle there once lived a King who had two children, a son
named Childe Wynde, and a daughter who was called May Margret. Their
mother, a fair woman, was dead, and the King mourned her long and
faithfully. But, after his son Childe Wynde went to seek his fortune,
the King, hunting in the forest, came across a lady of such great beauty
that he fell in love with her at once and determined to marry her.
Now Princess May Margret was not over-pleased to think that her mother's
place should be taken by a strange woman, nor was she pleased to think
that she would have to give up keeping house for her father the King.
For she had always taken a pride in her work. But she said nothing,
though she stood long on the castle walls looking out across the sea
wishing for her dear brother's return; for, see you, they had mothered
each other.
Still no news came of Childe Wynde; so on the day when the old King was
to bring the new Queen home, May Margret counted over the keys of the
castle chambers, knotted them on a string, and after casting them over
her left shoulder for luck--more for her father's sake than for the new
Queen's regard--she stood at the castle gate ready to hand over the keys
to her stepmother.
Now as the bridal procession approached with all the lords of the north
countrie, and some of the Scots lords in attendance, she looked so fair
and so sweet, that the lords whispered to one another of her beauty. And
when, after saying in a voice like a mavis--
  "Oh welcome, welcome, father,
   Unto your halls and towers!
   And welcome too, my stepmother,
   For all that's here is yours!"
she turned upon the step and tripped into the yard, the Scots lords said
aloud:
  "Forsooth! May Margret's grace
   Surpasses all that we have met, she has so fair a face!"
Now the new Queen overheard this, and she stamped her foot and her face
flushed with anger as she turned her about and called:
  "You might have excepted me,
   But I will bring May Margret to a Laidly Worm's degree;
   I'll bring her low as a Laidly Worm
   That warps about a stone,
   And not till the Childe of Wynde come back
   Will the witching be undone."
Well! hearing this May Margret laughed, not knowing that her new
stepmother, for all her beauty, was a witch; and the laugh made the
wicked woman still more angry. So that same night she left her royal
bed, and, returning to the lonely cave where she had ever done her
magic, she cast Princess May Margret under a spell with charms three
times three, and passes nine times nine. And this was her spell:
  "I weird ye to a Laidly Worm,
   And such sail ye ever be
   Until Childe Wynde the King's dear son
   Comes home across the sea.
   Until the world comes to an end
   Unspelled ye'll never be,
   Unless Childe Wynde of his own free will
   Sail give you kisses three!"
So it came to pass that Princess May Margret went to her bed a beauteous
maiden, full of grace, and rose next morning a Laidly Worm; for when her
tire-women came to dress her they found coiled up in her bed an awesome
dragon, which uncoiled itself and came towards them. And when they ran
away terrified, the Laidly Worm crawled and crept, and crept and crawled
down to the sea till it reached the rock of the Spindlestone which is
called the Heugh. And there it curled itself round the stone, and lay
basking in the sun.
Then for seven miles east and seven miles west and seven miles north and
south the whole country-side knew the hunger of the Laidly Worm of
Spindlestone Heugh, for it drove the awesome beast to leave its
resting-place at night and devour everything it came across.
At last a wise warlock told the people that if they wished to be quit of
these horrors, they must take every drop of the milk of seven white
milch kine every morn and every eve to the trough of stone at the foot
of the Heugh, for the Laidly Worm to drink. And this they did, and after
that the Laidly Worm troubled the country-side no longer; but lay warped
about the Heugh, looking out to sea with its terrible snout in the air.
But the word of its doings had gone east and had gone west; it had even
gone over the sea and had come to Childe Wynde's ears; and the news of
it angered him; for he thought perchance it had something to do with his
beloved sister May Margret's disappearance. So he called his men-at-arms
together and said:
"We must sail to Bamborough and land by Spindlestone, so as to quell and
kill this Laidly Worm."
Then they built a ship without delay, laying the keel with wood from the
rowan tree. And they made masts of rowan wood also, and oars likewise;
and, so furnished, set forth.
Now the wicked Queen knew by her arts they were coming, so she sent out
her imps to still the winds so that the fluttering sails of silk hung
idle on the masts. But Childe Wynde was not to be bested; so he called
out the oarsmen. Thus it came to pass that one morn the wicked Queen,
looking from the Keep, saw the gallant ship in Bamborough Bay, and she
sent out all her witch-wives and her impets to raise a storm and sink
the ship; but they came back unable to hurt it, for, see you, it was
built of rowan wood, over which witches have no power.
Then, as a last device, the Witch Queen laid spells upon the Laidly Worm
saying:
  "Oh! Laidly Worm! Go make their topmast heel,
   Go! Worm the sand, and creep beneath the keel."
Now the Laidly Worm had no choice but to obey. So:
  "The Worm leapt up, the Worm leapt down
   And plaited round each plank,
   And aye as the ship came close to shore
   She heeled as if she sank."
Three times three did Childe Wynde attempt to land, and three times
three the Laidly Worm kept the good ship from the shore. At last Childe
Wynde gave the word to put the ship about, and the Witch Queen, who was
watching from the Keep, thought he had given up: but he was not to be
bested: for he only rounded the next point to Budley sands. And there,
jumping into the shoal water, he got safely to land, and drawing his
sword of proof, rushed up to fight the awesome Worm. But as he raised
his sword to strike he heard a voice, soft as the western wind:
  "Oh quit thy sword, unbend thy bow,
     And give me kisses three,
   For though I seem a Laidly Worm
     No harm I'll do to thee!"
And the voice seemed to him like the voice of his dear sister May
Margret. So he stayed his hand. Then once again the Laidly Worm said:
     My laidly form forget.
   Forgive the wrong and kiss me thrice
     For love of May Margret."
Then Childe Wynde, remembering how he had loved his sister, put his arms
round the Laidly Worm and kissed it once. And he kissed the loathly
thing twice. And he kissed it yet a third time as he stood with the wet
sand at his feet.
Then with a hiss and a roar the Laidly Worm sank to the sand, and in his
arms was May Margret!
He wrapped her in his mantle, for she trembled in the cold sea air, and
carried her to Bamborough Castle, where the wicked Queen, knowing her
hour was come, stood, all deserted by her imps and witch-wives, on the
stairs, twisting her hands.
Then Childe Wynde looking at her cried:
  "Woe! Woe to thee, thou wicked Witch!
     An ill fate shalt thine be!
   The doom thou dreed on May Margret
     The same doom shalt thou dree.
   Henceforth thou'lt be a Laidly Toad
     That in the clay doth wend,
   And unspelled thou wilt never be
     Till this world hath an end."
And as he spoke the wicked Queen began to shrivel, and she shrivelled
and shrivelled to a horrid wrinkled toad that hopped down the castle
steps and disappeared in a crevice.
But to this day a loathsome toad is sometimes seen haunting Bamborough
Keep; and that Laidly Toad is the wicked Witch Queen!
But Childe Wynde and Princess May Margret loved each other as much as
ever, and lived happily ever after.
[Illustration: Tatty sat down and wept]
TITTY MOUSE AND TATTY MOUSE
Titty Mouse and Tatty Mouse both lived in a house.
Titty Mouse went a-gleaning, and Tatty Mouse went a-gleaning.
So they both went a-gleaning.
Titty Mouse gleaned an ear of corn, and Tatty Mouse gleaned an ear of
corn.
So they both gleaned an ear of corn.
Titty Mouse made a pudding, and Tatty Mouse made a pudding.
So they both made a pudding.
And Tatty Mouse put her pudding into the pot to boil.
But when Titty went to put hers in, the pot tumbled over, and scalded
her to death, and Tatty sat down and wept.
Then the three-legged stool said, "Tatty, why do you weep?"
"Titty's dead," said Tatty, "and so I weep."
"Then," said the stool, "I'll hop," so the stool hopped.
Then a broom in the corner of the room said, "Stool, why do you hop?"
"Oh!" said the stool, "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, and so I hop."
"Then," said the broom, "I'll sweep," so the broom began to sweep.
Then said the door, "Broom, why do you sweep?"
"Oh!" said the broom, "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, and the stool
hops, and so I sweep."
"Then," said the door, "I'll jar," so the door jarred.
Then the window said, "Door, why do you jar?"
"Oh!" said the door, "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, and the stool hops,
and the broom sweeps, and so I jar."
"Then," said the window, "I'll creak," so the window creaked.
Now there was an old form outside the house, and when the window
creaked, the form said, "Window, why do you creak?"
"Oh!" said the window, "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, and the stool
hops, and the broom sweeps, the door jars, and so I creak!"
"Then," said the old form, "I'll gallop round the house." So the old
form galloped round the house.
Now there was a fine large walnut tree growing by the cottage, and the
tree said to the form, "Form, why do you gallop round the house?"
"Oh!" says the form, "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, and the stool
hops, and the broom sweeps, the door jars, and the window creaks, and so
I gallop round the house."
"Then," said the walnut tree, "I'll shed my leaves." So the walnut tree
shed all its beautiful green leaves.
Now there was a little bird perched on one of the boughs of the tree,
and when all the leaves fell, it said, "Walnut tree, why do you shed
your leaves?"
"Oh!" said the tree, "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, the stool hops, and
the broom sweeps, the door jars, and the window creaks, the old form
gallops round the house, and so I shed my leaves."
"Then," said the little bird, "I'll moult all my feathers," so he
moulted all his gay feathers.
Now there was a little girl walking below, carrying a jug of milk for
her brothers' and sisters' supper, and when she saw the poor little bird
moult all its feathers, she said, "Little bird, why do you moult all
your feathers?"
"Oh!" said the little bird, "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, the stool
hops, and the broom sweeps, the door jars, and the window creaks, the
old form gallops round the house, the walnut tree sheds its leaves, and
so I moult all my feathers."
"Then," said the little girl, "I'll spill the milk." So she dropt the
pitcher and spilt the milk.
Now there was an old man just by on the top of a ladder thatching a
rick, and when he saw the little girl spill the milk, he said, "Little
girl, what do you mean by spilling the milk? your little brothers and
sisters must go without their suppers."
Then said the little girl, "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, the stool
old form gallops round the house, the walnut tree sheds all its leaves,
the little bird moults all its feathers, and so I spill the milk."
"Oh!" said the old man, "then I'll tumble off the ladder and break my
neck."
So he tumbled off the ladder and broke his neck; and when the old man
broke his neck, the great walnut tree fell down with a crash and upset
the old form and house, and the house falling knocked the window out,
and the window knocked the door down, and the door upset the broom, and
the broom upset the stool, and poor little Tatty Mouse was buried
beneath the ruins.
JACK AND THE BEANSTALK
A long long time ago, when most of the world was young and folk did what
they liked because all things were good, there lived a boy called Jack.
His father was bed-ridden, and his mother, a good soul, was busy early
morns and late eves planning and placing how to support her sick husband
and her young son by selling the milk and butter which Milky-White, the
beautiful cow, gave them without stint. For it was summer-time. But
winter came on; the herbs of the fields took refuge from the frosts in
the warm earth, and though his mother sent Jack to gather what fodder he
could get in the hedgerows, he came back as often as not with a very
empty sack; for Jack's eyes were so often full of wonder at all the
things he saw that sometimes he forgot to work!
So it came to pass that one morning Milky-White gave no milk at all--not
one drain! Then the good hard-working mother threw her apron over her
head and sobbed:
"What shall we do? What shall we do?"
Now Jack loved his mother; besides, he felt just a bit sneaky at being
such a big boy and doing so little to help, so he said, "Cheer up! Cheer
up! I'll go and get work somewhere." And he felt as he spoke as if he
would work his fingers to the bone; but the good woman shook her head
mournfully.
"You've tried that before, Jack," she said, "and nobody would keep you.
You are quite a good lad but your wits go a-wool-gathering. No, we must
sell Milky-White and live on the money. It is no use crying over milk
that is not here to spill!"
You see, she was a wise as well as a hard-working woman, and Jack's
spirits rose.
"Just so," he cried. "We will sell Milky-White and be richer than ever.
It's an ill wind that blows no one good. So, as it is market-day, I'll
just take her there and we shall see what we shall see."
"But--" began his mother.
"But doesn't butter parsnips," laughed Jack. "Trust me to make a good
bargain."
So, as it was washing-day, and her sick husband was more ailing than
usual, his mother let Jack set off to sell the cow.
"Not less than ten pounds," she bawled after him as he turned the
corner.
Ten pounds, indeed! Jack had made up his mind to twenty! Twenty solid
golden sovereigns!
He was just settling what he should buy his mother as a fairing out of
the money, when he saw a queer little old man on the road who called
out, "Good-morning, Jack!"
"Good-morning," replied Jack, with a polite bow, wondering how the queer
little old man happened to know his name; though, to be sure, Jacks were
as plentiful as blackberries.
"And where may you be going?" asked the queer little old man. Jack
wondered again--he was always wondering, you know--what the queer little
old man had to do with it; but, being always polite, he replied:
"I am going to market to sell Milky-White--and I mean to make a good
"So you will! So you will!" chuckled the queer little old man. "You
look the sort of chap for it. I bet you know how many beans make five?"
"Two in each hand and one in my mouth," answered Jack readily. He really
was sharp as a needle.
"Just so, just so!" chuckled the queer little old man; and as he spoke
he drew out of his pocket five beans. "Well, here they are, so give us
Milky-White."
Jack was so flabbergasted that he stood with his mouth open as if he
expected the fifth bean to fly into it.
"What!" he said at last. "My Milky-White for five common beans! Not if I
know it!"
"But they aren't common beans," put in the queer little old man, and
there was a queer little smile on his queer little face. "If you plant
these beans over-night, by morning they will have grown up right into
the very sky."
Jack was too flabbergasted this time even to open his mouth; his eyes
opened instead.
[Illustration: As he spoke he drew out of his pocket five beans]
"Did you say right into the very sky?" he asked at last; for, see you,
Jack had wondered more about the sky than about anything else.
"RIGHT UP INTO THE VERY SKY" repeated the queer old man, with a nod
between each word. "It's a good bargain, Jack; and, as fair play's a
jewel, if they don't--why! meet me here to-morrow morning and you shall
have Milky-White back again. Will that please you?"
"Right as a trivet," cried Jack, without stopping to think, and the next
moment he found himself standing on an empty road.
"Two in each hand and one in my mouth," repeated Jack. "That is what I
said, and what I'll do. Everything in order, and if what the queer
little old man said isn't true, I shall get Milky-White back to-morrow
So whistling and munching the bean he trudged home cheerfully, wondering
what the sky would be like if he ever got there.
"What a long time you've been!" exclaimed his mother, who was watching
anxiously for him at the gate. "It is past sun-setting; but I see you
have sold Milky-White. Tell me quick how much you got for her."
"You'll never guess," began Jack.
"Laws-a-mercy! You don't say so," interrupted the good woman. "And I
worriting all day lest they should take you in. What was it? Ten
pounds--fifteen--sure it can't be twenty!"
Jack held out the beans triumphantly.
"There," he said. "That's what I got for her, and a jolly good bargain
too!"
It was his mother's turn to be flabbergasted; but all she said was:
"What! Them beans!"
"Yes," replied Jack, beginning to doubt his own wisdom; "but they're
magic beans. If you plant them over-night, by morning
they--grow--right up--into--the--sky--Oh! Please don't hit so hard!"
For Jack's mother for once had lost her temper, and was belabouring the
boy for all she was worth. And when she had finished scolding and
beating, she flung the miserable beans out of window and sent him,
supperless, to bed.
If this was the magical effect of the beans, thought Jack ruefully, he
didn't want any more magic, if you please.
However, being healthy and, as a rule, happy, he soon fell asleep and
slept like a top.
When he woke he thought at first it was moonlight, for everything in the
room showed greenish. Then he stared at the little window. It was
covered as if with a curtain by leaves. He was out of bed in a trice,
and the next moment, without waiting to dress, was climbing up the
biggest beanstalk you ever saw. For what the queer little old man had
said was true! One of the beans which his mother had chucked into the
garden had found soil, taken root, and grown in the night....
Where?...
Up to the very sky? Jack meant to see at any rate.
So he climbed, and he climbed, and he climbed. It was easy work, for the
big beanstalk with the leaves growing out of each side was like a
ladder; for all that he soon was out of breath. Then he got his second
wind, and was just beginning to wonder if he had a third when he saw in
front of him a wide, shining white road stretching away, and away, and
So he took to walking, and he walked, and walked, and walked, till he
came to a tall, shining white house with a wide white doorstep.
And on the doorstep stood a great big woman with a black porridge-pot
in her hand. Now Jack, having had no supper, was hungry as a hunter, and
when he saw the porridge-pot he said quite politely:
"Good-morning, 'm. I wonder if you could give me some breakfast?"
"Breakfast!" echoed the woman, who, in truth, was an ogre's wife. "If it
is breakfast you're wanting, it's breakfast you'll likely be; for I
expect my man home every instant, and there is nothing he likes better
for breakfast than a boy--a fat boy grilled on toast."
Now Jack was not a bit of a coward, and when he wanted a thing he
generally got it, so he said cheerful-like:
"I'd be fatter if I'd had my breakfast!" Whereat the ogre's wife laughed
and bade Jack come in; for she was not, really, half as bad as she
looked. But he had hardly finished the great bowl of porridge and milk
she gave him when the whole house began to tremble and quake. It was the
ogre coming home!
                     Thump! THUMP!! THUMP!!!
"Into the oven with you, sharp!" cried the ogre's wife; and the iron
oven door was just closed when the ogre strode in. Jack could see him
through the little peep-hole slide at the top where the steam came out.
He was a big one for sure. He had three sheep strung to his belt, and
these he threw down on the table. "Here, wife," he cried, "roast me
these snippets for breakfast; they are all I've been able to get this
morning, worse luck! I hope the oven's hot?" And he went to touch the
handle, while Jack burst out all of a sweat, wondering what would happen
next.
"Roast!" echoed the ogre's wife. "Pooh! the little things would dry to
cinders. Better boil them."
So she set to work to boil them; but the ogre began sniffing about the
room. "They don't smell--mutton meat," he growled. Then he frowned
horribly and began the real ogre's rhyme:
  "Fee-fi-fo-fum,
   I'll grind his bones to make my bread."
"Don't be silly!" said his wife. "It's the bones of the little boy you
had for supper that I'm boiling down for soup! Come, eat your breakfast,
there's a good ogre!"
So the ogre ate his three sheep, and when he had done he went to a big
oaken chest and took out three big bags of golden pieces. These he put
on the table, and began to count their contents while his wife cleared
away the breakfast things. And by and by his head began to nod, and at
last he began to snore, and snored so loud that the whole house shook.
Then Jack nipped out of the oven and, seizing one of the bags of gold,
crept away, and ran along the straight, wide, shining white road as fast
as his legs would carry him till he came to the beanstalk. He couldn't
climb down it with the bag of gold, it was so heavy, so he just flung
his burden down first, and, helter-skelter, climbed after it.
And when he came to the bottom, there was his mother picking up gold
pieces out of the garden as fast as she could; for, of course, the bag
had burst.
"Laws-a-mercy me!" she says. "Wherever have you been? See! It's been
rainin' gold!"
"No, it hasn't," began Jack. "I climbed up--"
Then he turned to look for the beanstalk; but, lo and behold! it wasn't
there at all! So he knew, then, it was all real magic.
After that they lived happily on the gold pieces for a long time, and
the bed-ridden father got all sorts of nice things to eat; but, at last,
a day came when Jack's mother showed a doleful face as she put a big
yellow sovereign into Jack's hand and bade him be careful marketing,
because there was not one more in the coffer. After that they must
starve.
That night Jack went supperless to bed of his own accord. If he couldn't
make money, he thought, at any rate he could eat less money. It was a
shame for a big boy to stuff himself and bring no grist to the mill.
He slept like a top, as boys do when they don't overeat themselves, and
when he woke....
Hey, presto! the whole room showed greenish, and there was a curtain of
leaves over the window! Another bean had grown in the night, and Jack
was up it like a lamp-lighter before you could say knife.
This time he didn't take nearly so long climbing until he reached the
straight, wide, white road, and in a trice he found himself before the
tall white house, where on the wide white steps the ogre's wife was
standing with the black porridge-pot in her hand.
And this time Jack was as bold as brass. "Good-morning, 'm," he said.
"I've come to ask you for breakfast, for I had no supper, and I'm as
hungry as a hunter."
"Go away, bad boy!" replied the ogre's wife. "Last time I gave a boy
breakfast my man missed a whole bag of gold. I believe you are the same
boy."
"Maybe I am, maybe I'm not," said Jack, with a laugh. "I'll tell you
true when I've had my breakfast; but not till then."
So the ogre's wife, who was dreadfully curious, gave him a big bowl full
of porridge; but before he had half finished it he heard the ogre
coming--
                    Thump! THUMP! THUMP!
"In with you to the oven," shrieked the ogre's wife. "You shall tell me
when he has gone to sleep."
This time Jack saw through the steam peep-hole that the ogre had three
fat calves strung to his belt.
"Better luck to-day, wife!" he cried, and his voice shook the house.
"Quick! Roast these trifles for my breakfast! I hope the oven's hot?"
And he went to feel the handle of the door, but his wife cried out
sharply:
"Roast! Why, you'd have to wait hours before they were done! I'll broil
them--see how bright the fire is!"
"Umph!" growled the ogre. And then he began sniffing and calling out:
"Twaddle!" said the ogre's wife. "It's only the bones of the boy you had
last week that I've put into the pig-bucket!"
"Umph!" said the ogre harshly; but he ate the broiled calves, and then
he said to his wife, "Bring me my hen that lays the magic eggs. I want
to see gold."
So the ogre's wife brought him a great big black hen with a shiny red
comb. She plumped it down on the table and took away the breakfast
things.
Then the ogre said to the hen, "Lay!" and it promptly laid--what do you
think?--a beautiful, shiny, yellow, golden egg!
"None so dusty, henny-penny," laughed the ogre. "I shan't have to beg as
long as I've got you." Then he said, "Lay!" once more; and, lo and
behold! there was another beautiful, shiny, yellow, golden egg!
Jack could hardly believe his eyes, and made up his mind that he would
have that hen, come what might. So, when the ogre began to doze, he just
out like a flash from the oven, seized the hen, and ran for his life!
But, you see, he reckoned without his prize; for hens, you know, always
cackle when they leave their nests after laying an egg, and this one set
up such a scrawing that it woke the ogre.
"Where's my hen?" he shouted, and his wife came rushing in, and they
both rushed to the door; but Jack had got the better of them by a good
start, and all they could see was a little figure right away down the
wide white road, holding a big, scrawing, cackling, fluttering black hen
by the legs!
How Jack got down the beanstalk he never knew. It was all wings, and
leaves, and feathers, and cacklings; but get down he did, and there was
his mother wondering if the sky was going to fall!
But the very moment Jack touched ground he called out, "Lay!" and the
black hen ceased cackling and laid a great, big, shiny, yellow, golden
egg.
So every one was satisfied; and from that moment everybody had
everything that money could buy. For, whenever they wanted anything,
they just said, "Lay!" and the black hen provided them with gold.
But Jack began to wonder if he couldn't find something else besides
money in the sky. So one fine moonlight midsummer night he refused his
supper, and before he went to bed stole out to the garden with a big
watering-can and watered the ground under his window; for, thought he,
"there must be two more beans somewhere, and perhaps it is too dry for
them to grow." Then he slept like a top.
And, lo and behold! when he woke, there was the green light shimmering
through his room, and there he was in an instant on the beanstalk,
climbing, climbing, climbing for all he was worth.
But this time he knew better than to ask for his breakfast; for the
ogre's wife would be sure to recognise him. So he just hid in some
bushes beside the great white house, till he saw her in the scullery,
and then he slipped out and hid himself in the copper; for he knew she
would be sure to look in the oven first thing.
And by and by he heard--
                   Thump! THUMP! THUMP!
And peeping through a crack in the copper-lid, he could see the ogre
stalk in with three huge oxen strung at his belt. But this time, no
sooner had the ogre got into the house than he began shouting:
For, see you, the copper-lid didn't fit tight like the oven door, and
ogres have noses like a dog's for scent.
"Well, I declare, so do I!" exclaimed the ogre's wife. "It will be that
horrid boy who stole the bag of gold and the hen. If so, he's hid in the
oven!"
But when she opened the door, lo and behold! Jack wasn't there! Only
some joints of meat roasting and sizzling away. Then she laughed and
said, "You and me be fools for sure. Why, it's the boy you caught last
night as I was getting ready for your breakfast. Yes, we be fools to
take dead meat for live flesh! So eat your breakfast, there's a good
ogre!"
But the ogre, though he enjoyed roast boy very much, wasn't satisfied,
and every now and then he would burst out with "Fee-fi-fo-fum," and
get up and search the cupboards, keeping Jack in a fever of fear lest he
should think of the copper.
But he didn't. And when he had finished his breakfast he called out to
his wife, "Bring me my magic harp! I want to be amused."
So she brought out a little harp and put it on the table. And the ogre
leant back in his chair and said lazily:
                    "Sing!"
And, lo and behold! the harp began to sing. If you want to know what it
sang about? Why! It sang about everything! And it sang so beautifully
that Jack forgot to be frightened, and the ogre forgot to think of
"Fee-fi-fo-fum," and fell asleep and
                    did
                    NOT
                   SNORE.
Then Jack stole out of the copper like a mouse and crept hands and knees
to the table, raised himself up ever so softly and laid hold of the
magic harp; for he was determined to have it.
But, no sooner had he touched it, than it cried out quite loud, "Master!
Master!" So the ogre woke, saw Jack making off, and rushed after him.
My goodness, it was a race! Jack was nimble, but the ogre's stride was
twice as long. So, though Jack turned, and twisted, and doubled like a
hare, yet at last, when he got to the beanstalk, the ogre was not a
dozen yards behind him. There wasn't time to think, so Jack just flung
himself on to the stalk and began to go down as fast as he could, while
the harp kept calling, "Master! Master!" at the very top of its voice.
He had only got down about a quarter of the way when there was the most
awful lurch you can think of, and Jack nearly fell off the beanstalk. It
was the ogre beginning to climb down, and his weight made the stalk sway
like a tree in a storm. Then Jack knew it was life or death, and he
climbed down faster and faster, and as he climbed he shouted, "Mother!
Mother! Bring an axe! Bring an axe!"
Now his mother, as luck would have it, was in the backyard chopping
wood, and she ran out thinking that this time the sky must have fallen.
Just at that moment Jack touched ground, and he flung down the
harp--which immediately began to sing of all sorts of beautiful
things--and he seized the axe and gave a great chop at the beanstalk,
which shook and swayed and bent like barley before a breeze.
"Have a care!" shouted the ogre, clinging on as hard as he could. But
Jack did have a care, and he dealt that beanstalk such a shrewd blow
that the whole of it, ogre and all, came toppling down, and, of course,
the ogre broke his crown, so that he died on the spot.
[Illustration: "Fee-fi-fo-fum, I smell the blood of an Englishman."]
[Illustration: Jack seized the axe and gave a great chop at the
beanstalk]
After that every one was quite happy. For they had gold and to spare,
and if the bed-ridden father was dull, Jack just brought out the harp
and said, "Sing!" And, lo and behold! It sang about everything under the
sun.
So Jack ceased wondering so much and became quite a useful person.
And the last bean still hasn't grown yet. It is still in the garden.
I wonder if it will ever grow?
And what little child will climb its beanstalk into the sky?
And what will that child find?
Goody me!
THE BLACK BULL OF NORROWAY
Long ago in Norroway there lived a lady who had three daughters. Now
they were all pretty, and one night they fell a-talking of whom they
meant to marry.
And the eldest said, "I will have no one lower than an Earl."
And the second said, "I will have none lower than a Lord."
But the third, the prettiest and the merriest, tossed her head and said,
with a twinkle in her eye, "Why so proud? As for me I would be content
with the Black Bull of Norroway."
At that the other sisters bade her be silent and not talk lightly of
such a monster. For, see you, is it not written:
  To wilder measures now they turn,
    The black black Bull of Norroway;
  Sudden the tapers cease to burn,
    The minstrels cease to play.
So, no doubt, the Black Bull of Norroway was held to be a horrid
monster.
But the youngest daughter would have her laugh, so she said three times
that she would be content with the Black Bull of Norroway.
Well! It so happened that the very next morning a coach-and-six came
swinging along the road, and in it sate an Earl who had come to ask the
hand of the eldest daughter in marriage. So there were great rejoicings
over the wedding, and the bride and bridegroom drove away in the
coach-and-six.
Then the next thing that happened was that a coach-and-four with a Lord
in it came swinging along the road; and he wanted to marry the second
daughter. So they were wed, and there were great rejoicings, and the
bride and bridegroom drove away in the coach-and-four.
Now after this there was only the youngest, the prettiest and the
merriest, of the sisters left, and she became the apple of her mother's
eye. So you may imagine how the mother felt when one morning a terrible
bellowing was heard at the door, and there was a great big Black Bull
waiting for his bride.
She wept and she wailed, and at first the girl ran away and hid herself
in the cellar for fear, but there the Bull stood waiting, and at last
the girl came up and said:
"I promised I would be content with the Black Bull of Norroway, and I
must keep my word. Farewell, mother, you will not see me again."
Then she mounted on the Black Bull's back, and it walked away with her
quite quietly. And ever it chose the smoothest paths and the easiest
roads, so that at last the girl grew less afraid. But she became very
hungry and was nigh to faint when the Black Bull said to her, in quite a
soft voice that wasn't a bellow at all:
  "Eat out of my left ear,
     Drink out of my right,
   And set by what you leave
     To serve the morrow's night."
So she did as she was bid, and, lo and behold! the left ear was full of
delicious things to eat, and the right was full of the most delicious
drinks, and there was plenty left over for several days.
Thus they journeyed on, and they journeyed on, through many dreadful
forests and many lonely wastes, and the Black Bull never paused for bite
or sup, but ever the girl he carried ate out of his left ear and drank
out of his right, and set by what she left to serve the morrow's night.
And she slept soft and warm on his broad back.
Now at last they reached a noble castle where a large company of lords
and ladies were assembled, and greatly the company wondered at the sight
of these strange companions. And they invited the girl to supper, but
the Black Bull they turned into the field, and left to spend the night
after his kind.
But when the next morning came, there he was ready for his burden again.
Now, though the girl was loth to leave her pleasant companions, she
remembered her promise, and mounted on his back, so they journeyed on,
and journeyed on, and journeyed on, through many tangled woods and over
many high mountains. And ever the Black Bull chose the smoothest paths
for her and set aside the briars and brambles, while she ate out of his
left ear and drank out of his right.
So at last they came to a magnificent mansion where Dukes and Duchesses
and Earls and Countesses were enjoying themselves. Now the company,
though much surprised at the strange companions, asked the girl in to
supper; and the Black Bull they would have turned into the park for the
night, but that the girl, remembering how well he had cared for her,
asked them to put him into the stable and give him a good feed.
So this was done, and the next morning he was waiting before the
hall-door for his burden; and she, though somewhat loth at leaving the
fine company, mounted him cheerfully enough, and they rode away, and
they rode away, and they rode away, through thick briar brakes and up
fearsome cliffs. But ever the Black Bull trod the brambles underfoot and
chose the easiest paths, while she ate out of his left ear and drank out
of his right, and wanted for nothing, though he had neither bite nor
sup. So it came to pass that he grew tired and was limping with one foot
when, just as the sun was setting, they came to a beautiful palace where
Princes and Princesses were disporting themselves with ball on the green
grass. Now, though the company greatly wondered at the strange
companions, they asked the girl to join them, and ordered the grooms to
lead away the Black Bull to a field.
But she, remembering all he had done for her, said, "Not so! He will
stay with me!" Then seeing a large thorn in the foot with which he had
been limping, she stooped down and pulled it out.
And, lo and behold! in an instant, to every one's surprise, there
appeared, not a frightful monstrous bull, but one of the most beautiful
Princes ever beheld, who fell at his deliverer's feet, thanking her for
having broken his cruel enchantment.
A wicked witch-woman who wanted to marry him had, he said, spelled him
until a beautiful maiden of her own free will should do him a favour.
"But," he said, "the danger is not all over. You have broken the
enchantment by night; that by day has yet to be overcome."
So the next morning the Prince had to resume the form of a bull, and
they set out together; and they rode, and they rode, and they rode, till
they came to a dark and ugsome glen. And here he bade her dismount and
sit on a great rock.
"Here you must stay," he said, "while I go yonder and fight the Old One.
And mind! move neither hand nor foot whilst I am away, else I shall
never find you again. If everything around you turns blue, I shall have
beaten the Old One; but if everything turns red, he will have conquered
And with that, and a tremendous roaring bellow, he set off to find his
foe.
Well, she sate as still as a mouse, moving neither hand nor foot, nor
even her eyes, and waited, and waited, and waited. Then at last
everything turned blue. But she was so overcome with joy to think that
her lover was victorious that she forgot to keep still, and lifting one
of her feet, crossed it over the other!
So she waited, and waited, and waited. Long she sate, and aye she
wearied; and all the time he was seeking for her, but he never found
At last she rose and went she knew not whither, determined to seek for
her lover through the whole wide world. So she journeyed on, and she
journeyed on, and she journeyed on, until one day in a dark wood she
came to a little hut where lived an old, old woman who gave her food and
shelter, and bid her God-speed on her errand, giving her three nuts, a
walnut, a filbert, and a hazel nut, with these words:
  "When your heart is like to break,
     And once again is like to break,
   Crack a nut and in its shell
     That will be that suits you well."
After this she felt heartened up, and wandered on till her road was
blocked by a great hill of glass; and though she tried all she could to
climb it, she could not; for aye she slipped back, and slipped back, and
slipped back; for it was like ice.
Then she sought a passage elsewhere, and round and about the foot of the
hill she went sobbing and wailing, but ne'er a foothold could she find.
At last she came to a smithy; and the smith promised if she would serve
him faithfully for seven years and seven days, that he would make her
iron shoon wherewith to climb the hill of glass. So for seven long years
and seven short days she toiled, and span, and swept, and washed in the
smith's house. And for wage he gave her a pair of iron shoon, and with
them she clomb the glassy hill and went on her way.
Now she had not gone far before a company of fine lords and ladies rode
past her talking of all the grand doings that were to be done at the
young Duke of Norroway's wedding. Then she passed a number of people
carrying all sorts of good things which they told her were for the
Duke's wedding. And at last she came to a palace castle where the
courtyards were full of cooks and bakers, some running this way, some
running that, and all so busy that they did not know what to do first.
Then she heard the horns of hunters and cries of "Room! Room for the
Duke of Norroway and his bride!"
And who should ride past but the beautiful Prince she had but half
unspelled, and by his side was the witch-woman who was determined to
marry him that very day.
Well! at the sight she felt that her heart was indeed like to break, and
over again was like to break, so that the time had come for her to crack
one of the nuts. So she broke the walnut, as it was the biggest, and out
of it came a wonderful wee woman carding wool as fast as ever she could
card.
Now when the witch-woman saw this wonderful thing she offered the girl
her choice of anything in the castle for it.
"If you will put off your wedding with the Duke for a day, and let me
watch in his room to-night," said the girl, "you shall have it."
Now, like all witch-women, the bride wanted everything her own way, and
she was so sure she had her groom safe, that she consented; but before
the Duke went to rest she gave him, with her own hands, a posset so made
that any one who drank it would sleep till morning.
Thus, though the girl was allowed alone into the Duke's chamber, and
though she spent the livelong night sighing and singing:
  "Far have I sought for thee,
   Long have I wrought for thee,
   Near am I brought to thee,
   Dear Duke o' Norroway;
   Wilt thou say naught to me?"
the Duke never wakened, but slept on. So when day came the girl had to
leave him without his ever knowing she had been there.
Then once again her heart was like to break, and over and over again
like to break, and she cracked the filbert nut, because it was the next
biggest. And out of it came a wonderful wee, wee woman spinning away as
fast as ever she could spin. Now when the witch-bride saw this wonderful
thing she once again put off her wedding so that she might possess it.
And once again the girl spent the livelong night in the Duke's chamber
sighing and singing:
But the Duke, who had drunk the sleeping-draught from the hands of his
witch-bride, never stirred, and when dawn came the girl had to leave him
without his ever knowing she had been there.
Then, indeed, the girl's heart was like to break, and over and over and
over again like to break, so she cracked the last nut--the hazel
nut--and out of it came the most wonderful wee, wee, wee-est woman
reeling away at yarn as fast as she could reel.
And this marvel so delighted the witch-bride that once again she
consented to put off her wedding for a day, and allow the girl to watch
in the Duke's chamber the night through, in order to possess it.
Now it so happened that when the Duke was dressing that morning he heard
his pages talking amongst themselves of the strange sighing and singing
they had heard in the night; and he said to his faithful old valet,
"What do the pages mean?"
And the old valet, who hated the witch-bride, said:
"If the master will take no sleeping-draught to-night, mayhap he may
also hear what for two nights has kept me awake."
At this the Duke marvelled greatly, and when the witch-bride brought
him his evening posset, he made excuse it was not sweet enough, and
while she went away to get honey to sweeten it withal, he poured away
the posset and made believe he had swallowed it.
So that night when dark had come, and the girl stole in to his chamber
with a heavy heart thinking it would be the very last time she would
ever see him, the Duke was really broad awake. And when she sate down by
his bedside and began to sing:
                "Far have I sought for thee,"
he knew her voice at once, and clasped her in his arms.
Then he told her how he had been in the power of the witch-woman and had
forgotten everything, but that now he remembered all and that the spell
was broken for ever and aye.
So the wedding feast served for their marriage, since the witch-bride,
seeing her power was gone, quickly fled the country and was never heard
of again.
CATSKIN
Once upon a time there lived a gentleman who owned fine lands and
houses, and he very much wanted to have a son to be heir to them. So
when his wife brought him a daughter, though she was bonny as bonny
could be, he cared nought for her, and said:
"Let me never see her face."
So she grew up to be a beautiful maiden, though her father never set
eyes on her till she was fifteen years old and was ready to be married.
Then her father said roughly, "She shall marry the first that comes for
her." Now when this became known, who should come along and be first but
a nasty, horrid old man! So she didn't know what to do, and went to the
hen-wife and asked her advice. And the hen-wife said, "Say you will not
take him unless they give you a coat of silver cloth." Well, they gave
her a coat of silver cloth, but she wouldn't take him for all that, but
went again to the hen-wife, who said, "Say you will not take him unless
they give you a coat of beaten gold." Well, they gave her a coat of
beaten gold, but still she would not take the old man, but went again
to the hen-wife, who said, "Say you will not take him unless they give
you a coat made of the feathers of all the birds of the air." So they
sent out a man with a great heap of peas; and the man cried to all the
birds of the air, "Each bird take a pea and put down a feather." So each
bird took a pea and put down one of its feathers: and they took all the
feathers and made a coat of them and gave it to her; but still she would
not take the nasty, horrid old man, but asked the hen-wife once again
what she was to do, and the hen-wife said, "Say they must first make you
a coat of catskin." Then they made her a coat of catskin; and she put it
on, and tied up her other coats into a bundle, and when it was
night-time ran away with it into the woods.
Now she went along, and went along, and went along, till at the end of
the wood she saw a fine castle. Then she hid her fine dresses by a
crystal waterfall and went up to the castle gates and asked for work.
The lady of the castle saw her, and told her, "I'm sorry I have no
better place, but if you like you may be our scullion." So down she went
into the kitchen, and they called her Catskin, because of her dress. But
the cook was very cruel to her, and led her a sad life.
Well, soon after that it happened that the young lord of the castle came
home, and there was to be a grand ball in honour of the occasion. And
when they were speaking about it among the servants, "Dear me, Mrs.
Cook," said Catskin, "how much I should like to go!"
"What! You dirty, impudent slut," said the cook, "you go among all the
fine lords and ladies with your filthy catskin? A fine figure you'd
Catskin's face. But Catskin only shook her ears and said nothing.
Now when the day of the ball arrived, Catskin slipped out of the house
and went to the edge of the forest where she had hidden her dresses.
Then she bathed herself in a crystal waterfall, and put on her coat of
his heart to her. He asked her to be his partner for the first dance;
and he would dance with none other the livelong night.
maid, where you live?"
But Catskin curtsied and said:
  "Kind sir, if the truth I must tell,
   At the sign of the 'Basin of Water' I dwell."
slipped into the scullery, unbeknown to the cook.
The young lord went the very next day and searched for the sign of the
"Basin of Water"; but he could not find it. So he went to his mother,
the lady of the castle, and declared he would wed none other but the
lady of the silver dress, and would never rest till he had found her.
So another ball was soon arranged in hopes that the beautiful maid would
appear again.
So Catskin said to the cook, "Oh, how I should like to go!" Whereupon
the cook screamed out in a rage, "What, you, you dirty, impudent slut!
You would cut a fine figure among all the fine lords and ladies." And
with that she up with a ladle and broke it across Catskin's back. But
Catskin only shook her ears, and ran off to the forest, where, first of
all, she bathed, and then she put on her coat of beaten gold, and off
she went to the ball-room.
As soon as she entered all eyes were upon her; and the young lord at
once recognised her as the lady of the "Basin of Water," claimed her
hand for the first dance, and did not leave her till the last. When that
   At the sign of the 'Broken Ladle' I dwell";
and with that she curtsied and flew from the ball, off with her golden
Next day, when the young lord could not find where the sign of the
"Basin of Water" was, he begged his mother to have another grand ball,
so that he might meet the beautiful maid once more.
Then Catskin said to the cook, "Oh, how I wish I could go to the ball!"
Whereupon the cook called out: "A fine figure you'd cut!" and broke the
skimmer across her head. But Catskin only shook her ears, and went off
to the forest, where she first bathed in the crystal spring, and then
dressed in so rich and rare a dress; but the young lord at once
recognised his beautiful sweetheart, and would dance with none but her
the whole evening. When the ball came to an end he pressed her to tell
him where she lived, but all she would answer was:
   At the sign of the 'Broken Skimmer' I dwell";
Next day he went to his mother, and told her that he wished to marry the
scullery-maid, Catskin.
"Never," said the lady of the castle--"never so long as I live."
[Illustration: She went along, and went along, and went along]
Well, the young lord was so grieved that he took to his bed and was very
ill indeed. The doctor tried to cure him, but he would not take any
medicine unless from the hands of Catskin. At last the doctor went to
the mother, and said that her son would die if she did not consent to
his marriage with Catskin; so she had to give way. Then she summoned
Catskin to her, and Catskin put on her coat of beaten gold before she
went to see the lady; and she, of course, was overcome at once, and was
only too glad to wed her son to so beautiful a maid.
So they were married, and after a time a little son was born to them,
and grew up a fine little lad. Now one day, when he was about four years
old, a beggar woman came to the door, and Lady Catskin gave some money
to the little lord and told him to go and give it to the beggar woman.
So he went and gave it, putting it into the hand of the woman's baby
child; and the child leant forward and kissed the little lord.
Now the wicked old cook (who had never been sent away, because Catskin
was too kind-hearted) was looking on, and she said, "See how beggars'
brats take to one another!"
This insult hurt Catskin dreadfully: and she went to her husband, the
young lord, and told him all about her father, and begged he would go
and find out what had become of her parents. So they set out in the
lord's grand coach, and travelled through the forest till they came to
the house of Catskin's father. Then they put up at an inn near, and
Catskin stopped there, while her husband went to see if her father would
own she was his daughter.
he was all alone in the world, and sate moping and miserable. When the
young lord came in he hardly looked up, he was so miserable. Then
Catskin's husband drew a chair close up to him, and asked him, "Pray,
sir, had you not once a young daughter whom you would never see or
own?"
And the miserable man said with tears, "It is true; I am a hardened
sinner. But I would give all my worldly goods if I could but see her
once before I die."
Then the young lord told him what had happened to Catskin, and took him
to the inn, and afterwards brought his father-in-law to his own castle,
THE THREE LITTLE PIGS
Once upon a time there was an old sow who had three little pigs, and as
she had not enough for them to eat, she said they had better go out into
the world and seek their fortunes.
Now the eldest pig went first, and as he trotted along the road he met a
man carrying a bundle of straw. So he said very politely:
"If you please, sir, could you give me that straw to build me a house?"
And the man, seeing what good manners the little pig had, gave him the
straw, and the little pig set to work and built a beautiful house with
Now, when it was finished, a wolf happened to pass that way; and he saw
the house, and he smelt the pig inside.
So he knocked at the door and said:
"Little pig! Little pig! Let me in! Let me in!"
But the little pig saw the wolf's big paws through the keyhole, so he
answered back:
"No! No! No! by the hair of my chinny chin chin!" Then the wolf
showed his teeth and said:
"Then I'll huff and I'll puff and I'll blow your house in."
[Illustration: So he huffed and he puffed and he blew the house in]
So he huffed and he puffed and he blew the house in. Then he ate up
little piggy and went on his way.
Now, the next piggy, when he started, met a man carrying a bundle of
furze, and, being very polite, he said to him:
"If you please, sir, could you give me that furze to build me a house?"
furze, and the little pig set to work and built himself a beautiful
Now it so happened that when the house was finished the wolf passed that
way; and he saw the house, and he smelt the pig inside.
But the little pig peeped through the keyhole and saw the wolf's great
ears, so he answered back:
"No! No! No! by the hair of my chinny chin chin!"
Then the wolf showed his teeth and said:
"Then I'll huff and I'll puff and I'll blow your house in!"
Now the third little piggy, when he started, met a man carrying a load
of bricks, and, being very polite, he said:
"If you please sir, could you give me those bricks to build me a house?"
And the man, seeing that he had been well brought up, gave him the
bricks, and the little pig set to work and built himself a beautiful
And once again it happened that when it was finished the wolf chanced to
come that way; and he saw the house, and he smelt the pig inside.
eyes, so he answered:
"Then I'll huff and I'll puff and I'll blow your house in!" says the
wolf, showing his teeth.
[Illustration: Well! he huffed and he puffed ... but he could not
blow the house down]
Well! he huffed and he puffed. He puffed and he huffed. And he huffed,
huffed, and he puffed, puffed; but he could not blow the house down.
At last he was so out of breath that he couldn't huff and he couldn't
puff any more. So he thought a bit. Then he said:
"Little pig! I know where there is ever such a nice field of turnips."
"Do you," says little piggy, "and where may that be?"
"I'll show you," says the wolf; "if you will be ready at six o'clock
to-morrow morning, I will call round for you, and we can go together to
Farmer Smith's field and get turnips for dinner."
"Thank you kindly," says the little piggy. "I will be ready at six
o'clock sharp."
But, you see, the little pig was not one to be taken in with chaff, so
he got up at five, trotted off to Farmer Smith's field, rooted up the
turnips, and was home eating them for breakfast when the wolf clattered
at the door and cried:
"Little pig! Little pig! Aren't you ready?"
"Ready?" says the little piggy. "Why! what a sluggard you are! I've been
to the field and come back again, and I'm having a nice potful of
turnips for breakfast."
Then the wolf grew red with rage; but he was determined to eat little
piggy, so he said, as if he didn't care:
"I'm glad you like them; but I know of something better than turnips."
"Indeed," says little piggy, "and what may that be?"
"A nice apple tree down in Merry gardens with the juiciest, sweetest
apples on it! So if you will be ready at five o'clock to-morrow morning
I will come round for you and we can get the apples together."
"Thank you kindly," says little piggy. "I will sure and be ready at five
Now the next morning he bustled up ever so early, and it wasn't four
o'clock when he started to get the apples; but, you see, the wolf had
been taken in once and wasn't going to be taken in again, so he also
started at four o'clock, and the little pig had but just got his basket
half full of apples when he saw the wolf coming down the road licking
his lips.
"Hullo!" says the wolf, "here already! You are an early bird! Are the
apples nice?"
"Very nice," says little piggy; "I'll throw you down one to try."
And he threw it so far away, that when the wolf had gone to pick it up,
the little pig was able to jump down with his basket and run home.
Well, the wolf was fair angry; but he went next day to the little
piggy's house and called through the door, as mild as milk:
"Little pig! Little pig! You are so clever, I should like to give you a
fairing; so if you will come with me to the fair this afternoon you
shall have one."
"Thank you kindly," says little piggy. "What time shall we start?"
"At three o'clock sharp," says the wolf, "so be sure to be ready."
"I'll be ready before three," sniggered the little piggy. And he was! He
started early in the morning and went to the fair, and rode in a swing,
and enjoyed himself ever so much, and bought himself a butter-churn as a
fairing, and trotted away towards home long before three o'clock. But
just as he got to the top of the hill, what should he see but the wolf
coming up it, all panting and red with rage!
Well, there was no place to hide in but the butter-churn; so he crept
into it, and was just pulling down the cover when the churn started to
roll down the hill--
Bumpety, bumpety, bump!
Of course piggy, inside, began to squeal, and when the wolf heard the
noise, and saw the butter-churn rolling down on top of him--
--he was so frightened that he turned tail and ran away.
But he was still determined to get the little pig for his dinner; so he
went next day to the house and told the little pig how sorry he was not
to have been able to keep his promise of going to the fair, because of
an awful, dreadful, terrible Thing that had rushed at him, making a
fearsome noise.
"Dear me!" says the little piggy, "that must have been me! I hid inside
the butter-churn when I saw you coming, and it started to roll! I am
sorry I frightened you!"
But this was too much. The wolf danced about with rage and swore he
would come down the chimney and eat up the little pig for his supper.
But while he was climbing on to the roof the little pig made up a
blazing fire and put on a big pot full of water to boil. Then, just as
the wolf was coming down the chimney, the little piggy off with the lid,
and plump! in fell the wolf into the scalding water.
So the little piggy put on the cover again, boiled the wolf up, and ate
him for supper.
NIX NAUGHT NOTHING
Once upon a time there lived a King and a Queen who didn't differ much
from all the other kings and queens who have lived since Time began. But
they had no children, and this made them very sad indeed. Now it so
happened that the King had to go and fight battles in a far country, and
he was away for many long months. And, lo and behold! while he was away
the Queen at long last bore him a little son. As you may imagine, she
was fair delighted, and thought how pleased the King would be when he
came home and found that his dearest wish had been fulfilled. And all
the courtiers were fine and pleased too, and set about at once to
arrange a grand festival for the naming of the little Prince. But the
Queen said, "No! The child shall have no name till his father gives it
to him. Till then we will call him 'Nix! Naught! Nothing!' because his
father knows nothing about him!"
So little Prince Nix Naught Nothing grew into a strong, hearty little
lad; for his father did not come back for a long time, and did not even
know that he had a son.
But at long last he turned his face homewards. Now, on the way, he came
to a big rushing river which neither he nor his army could cross, for it
was flood-time and the water was full of dangerous whirlpools, where
nixies and water-wraiths lived, always ready to drown men.
So they were stopped, until a huge giant appeared, who could take the
river, whirlpool and all, in his stride; and he said kindly, "I'll carry
you all over, if you like." Now, though the giant smiled and was very
polite, the King knew enough of the ways of giants to think it wiser to
have a hard and fast bargain. So he said, quite curt, "What's your pay?"
"Pay?" echoed the giant, with a grin, "what do you take me for? Give me
Nix Naught Nothing, and I'll do the job with a glad heart."
Now the King felt just a trifle ashamed at the giant's generosity; so he
said, "Certainly, certainly. I'll give you nix naught nothing and my
thanks into the bargain."
So the giant carried them safely over the stream and past the
whirlpools, and the King hastened homewards. If he was glad to see his
dear wife, the Queen, you may imagine how he felt when she showed him
his young son, tall and strong for his age.
"And what's your name, young sir?" he asked of the child fast clasped in
his arms.
"Nix Naught Nothing," answered the boy; "that's what they call me till
my father gives me a name."
Well! the King nearly dropped the child, he was so horrified. "What
have I done?" he cried. "I promised to give nix naught nothing to the
giant who carried us over the whirlpools where the nixies and
water-wraiths live."
At this the Queen wept and wailed; but being a clever woman she thought
out a plan whereby to save her son. So she said to her husband the King,
"If the giant comes to claim his promise, we will give him the
hen-wife's youngest boy. She has so many she will not mind if we give
her a crown piece, and the giant will never know the difference."
Now sure enough the very next morning the giant appeared to claim Nix
Naught Nothing, and they dressed up the hen-wife's boy in the Prince's
clothes and wept and wailed when the giant, fine and satisfied, carried
his prize off on his back. But after a while he came to a big stone and
sat down to ease his shoulders. And he fell a-dozing. Now, when he woke,
he started up in a fluster, and called out:
  "Hodge, Hodge, on my shoulders! Say
   What d'ye make the time o' day?"
And the hen-wife's little boy replied:
  "Time that my mother the hen-wife takes
   The eggs for the wise Queen's breakfast cakes!"
Then the giant saw at once the trick that had been played on him, and he
threw the hen-wife's boy on the ground, so that his head hit on the
stone and he was killed.
Then the giant strode back to the palace in a tower of a temper, and
demanded "Nix Naught Nothing." So this time they dressed up the
gardener's boy, and wept and wailed when the giant, fine and satisfied,
carried his prize off on his back. Then the same thing happened. The
giant grew weary of his burden, and sate down on the big stone to rest.
So he fell a-dozing, woke with a start, and called out:
And the gardener's boy replied:
  "Time that my father the gardener took
   Greens for the wise Queen's dinner to cook!"
So the giant saw at once that a second trick had been played on him and
became quite mad with rage. He flung the boy from him so that he was
killed, and then strode back to the palace, where he cried with fury:
"Give me what you promised to give, Nix Naught Nothing, or I will
destroy you all, root and branch."
So then they saw they must give up the dear little Prince, and this time
they really wept and wailed as the giant carried off the boy on his
back. And this time, after the giant had had his rest at the big stone,
and had woke up and called:
the little Prince replied:
  "Time for the King my father to call,
  'Let supper be served in the banqueting hall.'"
Then the giant laughed with glee and rubbed his hands saying, "I've got
the right one at last." So he took Nix Naught Nothing to his own house
under the whirlpools; for the giant was really a great Magician who
could take any form he chose. And the reason he wanted a little prince
so badly was that he had lost his wife, and had only one little daughter
who needed a playmate sorely. So Nix Naught Nothing and the Magician's
daughter grew up together, and every year made them fonder and fonder of
each other, until she promised to marry him.
Now the Magician had no notion that his daughter should marry just an
ordinary human prince, the like of whom he had eaten a thousand times,
so he sought some way in which he could quietly get rid of Nix Naught
Nothing. So he said one day, "I have work for you, Nix Naught Nothing!
There is a stable hard by which is seven miles long, and seven miles
broad, and it has not been cleaned for seven years. By to-morrow evening
you must have cleaned it, or I will have you for my supper."
Well, before dawn, Nix Naught Nothing set to work at his task; but, as
fast as he cleared the muck, it just fell back again. So by
breakfast-time he was in a terrible sweat; yet not one whit nearer the
end of his job was he. Now the Magician's daughter, coming to bring him
his breakfast, found him so distraught and distracted that he could
scarce speak to her.
"We'll soon set that to rights," she said. So she just clapped her hands
and called:
  "Beasts and birds o' each degree,
   Clean me this stable for love o' me."
And, lo and behold! in a minute the beasts of the fields came trooping,
and the sky was just dark with the wings of birds, and they carried away
the muck, and the stable was clean as a new pin before the evening.
Now when the Magician saw this, he grew hot and angry, and he guessed it
was his daughter's magic that had wrought the miracle. So he said:
"Shame on the wit that helped you; but I have a harder job for you
to-morrow. Yonder is a lake seven miles long, seven miles broad, and
seven miles deep. Drain it by nightfall, so that not one drop remains,
or, of a certainty, I eat you for supper."
So once again Nix Naught Nothing rose before dawn, and began his task;
but though he baled out the water without ceasing, it ever ran back, so
that though he sweated and laboured, by breakfast-time he was no nearer
the end of his job.
But when the Magician's daughter came with his breakfast she only
laughed and said, "I'll soon mend that!" Then she clapped her hands and
called:
  "Oh! all ye fish of river and sea,
   Drink me this water for love of me!"
And, lo and behold! the lake was thick with fishes. And they drank and
drank, till not one drop remained.
Now when the Magician returned in the morning and saw this he was as
angry as angry. And he knew it was his daughter's magic, so he said:
"Double shame on the wit that helped you! Yet it betters you not, for I
will give you a yet harder task than the last. If you do that, you may
have my daughter. See you, yonder is a tree, seven miles high, and no
branch to it till the top, and there on the fork is a nest with some
eggs in it. Bring those eggs down without breaking one or, sure as fate,
I'll eat you for my supper."
Then the Magician's daughter was very sad; for with all her magic she
could think of no way of helping her lover to fetch the eggs and bring
them down unbroken. So she sate with Nix Naught Nothing underneath the
tree, and thought, and thought, and thought; until an idea came to her,
and she clapped her hands and cried:
  "Fingers of mine, for love of me,
   Help my true lover to climb the tree."
Then her fingers dropped off her hands one by one and ranged themselves
like the steps of a ladder up the tree; but they were not quite enough
of them to reach the top, so she cried again:
  "Oh! toes of mine, for love o' me,
Then her toes began to drop off one by one and range themselves like the
rungs of a ladder; but when the toes of one foot had gone to their
places the ladder was tall enough. So Nix Naught Nothing climbed up it,
reached the nest, and got the seven eggs. Now, as he was coming down
with the last, he was so overjoyed at having finished his task, that he
turned to see if the Magician's daughter was overjoyed too: and lo! the
seventh egg slipped from his hand and fell
                         Crash!
"Quick! Quick!" cried the Magician's daughter, who, as you will observe,
always had her wits about her. "There is nothing for it now but to fly
at once. But first I must have my magic flask, or I shall be unable to
help. It is in my room and the door is locked. Put your fingers, since I
have none, in my pocket, take the key, unlock the door, get the flask,
and follow me fast. I shall go slower than you, for I have no toes on
one foot!"
So Nix Naught Nothing did as he was bid, and soon caught up the
Magician's daughter. But alas! they could not run very fast, so ere long
the Magician, who had once again taken a giant's form in order to have a
long stride, could be seen behind them. Nearer and nearer he came until
he was just going to seize Nix Naught Nothing, when the Magician's
daughter cried: "Put your fingers, since I have none, into my hair, take
my comb and throw it down." So Nix Naught Nothing did as he was bid,
and, lo and behold! out of every one of the comb-prongs there sprang up
a prickly briar, which grew so fast that the Magician found himself in
the middle of a thorn hedge! You may guess how angry and scratched he
was before he tore his way out. So Nix Naught Nothing and his sweetheart
had time for a good start; but the Magician's daughter could not run
fast because she had lost her toes on one foot! Therefore the Magician
in giant form soon caught them up, and he was just about to grip Nix
Naught Nothing when the Magician's daughter cried: "Put your fingers,
since I have none, to my breast. Take out my veil-dagger and throw it
down."
So he did as he was bid, and in a moment the dagger had grown to
thousands and thousands of sharp razors, criss-cross on the ground, and
the Magician giant was howling with pain as he trod among them. You may
guess how he danced and stumbled and how long it took for him to pick
his way through as if he were walking on eggs!
So Nix Naught Nothing and his sweetheart were nearly out of sight ere
the giant could start again; yet it wasn't long before he was like to
catch them up; for the Magician's daughter, you see, could not run fast
because she had lost her toes on one foot! She did what she could, but
it was no use. So just as the giant was reaching out a hand to lay hold
of Nix Naught Nothing she cried breathlessly:
"There's nothing left but the magic flask. Take it out and sprinkle some
of what it holds on the ground."
And Nix Naught Nothing did as he was bid; but in his hurry he nearly
emptied the flask altogether; and so the big, big wave of water which
instantly welled up, swept him off his feet, and would have carried him
away, had not the Magician's daughter's loosened veil caught him and
held him fast. But the wave grew, and grew, and grew behind them, until
it reached the giant's waist; then it grew and grew until it reached
his shoulders; and it grew and grew until it swept over his head: a
great big sea-wave full of little fishes and crabs and sea-snails and
all sorts of strange creatures.
So that was the last of the Magician giant. But the poor little
Magician's daughter was so weary that, after a time she couldn't move a
step further, and she said to her lover, "Yonder are lights burning. Go
and see if you can find a night's lodging: I will climb this tree by the
pool where I shall be safe, and by the time you return I shall be
rested."
Now, by chance, it happened that the lights they saw were the lights of
the castle where Nix Naught Nothing's father and mother, the King and
Queen, lived (though of course, he did not know this); so, as he walked
towards the castle, he came upon the hen-wife's cottage and asked for a
night's lodging.
"Who are you?" asked the hen-wife suspiciously.
"I am Nix Naught Nothing," replied the young man.
Now the hen-wife still grieved over her boy who had been killed, so she
instantly resolved to be revenged.
"I cannot give you a night's lodging," she said, "but you shall have a
drink of milk, for you look weary. Then you can go on to the castle and
beg for a bed there."
So she gave him a cup of milk; but, being a witch-woman, she put a
potion to it so that the very moment he saw his father and mother he
should fall fast asleep, and none should be able to waken him so he
would be no use to anybody, and would not recognize his father and
Now the King and Queen had never ceased grieving for their lost son.
They were always very kind to wandering young men, and when they heard
that one was begging a night's lodging, they went down to the hall to
see him. And lo, the moment Nix Naught Nothing caught sight of his
father and mother, there he was on the floor fast asleep, and none could
waken him! He did not recognize his father and mother nor they did not
recognize him.
But Prince Nix Naught Nothing had grown into a very handsome young man,
so they pitied him very much, and when none, do what they would, could
waken him, the King said, "A maiden will likely take more trouble to
waken him than others, seeing how handsome he is. Send forth a
proclamation that if any maiden in my realm can waken this young man,
she shall have him in marriage, and a handsome dowry to boot."
So the proclamation was sent forth, and all the pretty maidens of the
realm came to try their luck, but they had no success.
Now the gardener whose boy had been killed by the giant had a daughter
who was very ugly indeed--so ugly that she thought it no use to try her
luck, and went about her work as usual. So she took her pitcher to the
pool to fill it. Now the Magician's daughter was still hiding in the
tree waiting for her lover to return. Thus it came to pass that the
gardener's ugly daughter, bending down to fill her pitcher in the pool,
saw a beautiful shadow in the water, and thought it was her own!
"If I am as pretty as that," she cried, "I'll draw water no longer!"
So she threw down her pitcher, and went straight to the castle to see if
she hadn't a chance of the handsome stranger and the handsome dowry. But
of course she hadn't; though at the sight of Nix Naught Nothing she fell
so much in love with him, that, knowing the hen-wife to be a witch, she
went straight to her, and offered all her savings for a charm by which
she could awaken the sleeper.
Now when the hen-wife witch heard her tale, she thought it would be a
rare revenge to marry the King and Queen's long-lost son to a gardener's
ugly daughter; so she straightway took the girl's savings and gave her a
charm by which she could unspell the Prince or spell him again at her
pleasure.
So away went the gardener's daughter to the castle, and sure enough, no
sooner had she sung her charm, than Nix Naught Nothing awoke.
"I am going to marry you, my charmer," she said coaxingly; but Nix
Naught Nothing said he would prefer sleep. So she thought it wiser to
put him to sleep again till the marriage feast was ready and she had got
her fine clothes. So she spelled him asleep again.
Now the gardener had, of course, to draw the water himself, since his
daughter would not work. And he took the pitcher to the pool; and he
also saw the Magician's daughter's shadow in the water; but he did not
think the face was his own, for, see you, he had a beard!
Then he looked up and saw the lady in the tree.
She, poor thing, was half dead with sorrow, and hunger, and fatigue,
so, being a kind man, he took her to his house and gave her food. And he
told her that that very day his daughter was to marry a handsome young
stranger at the castle, and to get a handsome dowry to boot from the
King and Queen, in memory of their son, Nix Naught Nothing, who had been
carried off by a giant when he was a little boy.
Then the Magician's daughter felt sure that something had happened to
her lover; so she went to the castle, and there she found him fast
asleep in a chair.
But she could not waken him, for, see you, her magic had gone from her
with the magic flask which Nix Naught Nothing had emptied.
So, though she put her fingerless hands on his and wept and sang:
  "I cleaned the stable for love o' thee,
   I laved the lake and I clomb the tree,
   Wilt thou not waken for love o' me?"
he never stirred nor woke.
Now one of the old servants there, seeing how she wept, took pity on her
and said, "She that is to marry the young man will be back ere long, and
unspell him for the wedding. Hide yourself and listen to her charm."
So the Magician's daughter hid herself, and, by and by, in comes the
gardener's daughter in her fine wedding-dress, and begins to sing her
charm. But the Magician's daughter didn't wait for her to finish it; for
the moment Nix Naught Nothing opened his eyes, she rushed out of her
hiding-place, and put her fingerless hands in his.
Then Nix Naught Nothing remembered everything. He remembered the castle,
he remembered his father and mother, he remembered the Magician's
daughter and all that she had done for him.
Then he drew out the magic flask and said, "Surely, surely there must be
enough magic in it to mend your hands." And there was. There were just
fourteen drops left, ten for the fingers and four for the toes; but
there was not one for the little toe, so it could not be brought back.
Of course, after that there was great rejoicing, and Prince Nix Naught
Nothing and the Magician's daughter were married and lived happy ever
after, even though she only had four toes on one foot. As for the
hen-wife witch, she was burnt, and so the gardener's daughter got back
her earnings; but she was not happy, because her shadow in the water was
ugly again.
MR. AND MRS. VINEGAR
Mr. and Mrs. Vinegar, a worthy couple, lived in a glass pickle-jar. The
house, though small, was snug, and so light that each speck of dust on
the furniture showed like a mole-hill; so while Mr. Vinegar tilled his
garden with a pickle-fork and grew vegetables for pickling, Mrs.
Vinegar, who was a sharp, bustling, tidy woman, swept, brushed, and
dusted, brushed and dusted and swept to keep the house clean as a new
pin. Now one day she lost her temper with a cobweb and swept so hard
after it that bang! bang! the broom-handle went right through the glass,
and crash! crash! clitter! clatter! there was the pickle-jar house about
her ears all in splinters and bits.
She picked her way over these as best she might, and rushed into the
garden.
"Oh, Vinegar, Vinegar!" she cried. "We are clean ruined and done for!
Quit these vegetables! they won't be wanted! What is the use of pickles
if you haven't a pickle-jar to put them in, and--I've broken ours--into
little bits!" And with that she fell to crying bitterly.
But Mr. Vinegar was of different mettle; though a small man, he was a
cheerful one, always looking at the best side of things, so he said,
"Accidents will happen, lovey! But there are as good pickle-bottles in
the shop as ever came out of it. All we need is money to buy another. So
let us go out into the world and seek our fortunes."
"But what about the furniture?" sobbed Mrs. Vinegar.
"I will take the door of the house with me, lovey," quoth Mr. Vinegar
stoutly. "Then no one will be able to open it, will they?"
Mrs. Vinegar did not quite see how this fact would mend matters, but,
being a good wife, she held her peace. So off they trudged into the
world to seek fortune, Mr. Vinegar bearing the door on his back like a
snail carries its house.
Well, they walked all day long, but not a brass farthing did they make,
and when night fell they found themselves in a dark, thick forest. Now
Mrs. Vinegar, for all she was a smart, strong woman, was tired to death,
and filled with fear of wild beasts, so she began once more to cry
bitterly; but Mr. Vinegar was cheerful as ever.
"Don't alarm yourself, lovey," he said. "I will climb into a tree, fix
the door firmly in a fork, and you can sleep there as safe and
comfortable as in your own bed."
So he climbed the tree, fixed the door, and Mrs. Vinegar lay down on it,
and being dead tired was soon fast asleep. But her weight tilted the
door sideways, so, after a time, Mr. Vinegar, being afraid she might
slip off, sate down on the other side to balance her and keep watch.
Now in the very middle of the night, just as he was beginning to nod,
what should happen but that a band of robbers should meet beneath that
very tree in order to divide their spoils. Mr. Vinegar could hear every
word said quite distinctly, and began to tremble like an aspen as he
listened to the terrible deeds the thieves had done to gain their ends.
"Don't shake so!" murmured Mrs. Vinegar, half asleep. "You'll have me
off the bed."
"I'm not shaking, lovey," whispered back Mr. Vinegar in a quaking voice.
"It is only the wind in the trees."
But for all his cheerfulness he was not really very brave inside, so
he went on trembling and shaking, and shaking and trembling, till, just
as the robbers were beginning to parcel out the money, he actually shook
the door right out of the tree-fork, and down it came--with Mrs. Vinegar
still asleep upon it--right on top of the robbers' heads!
As you may imagine, they thought the sky had fallen, and made off as
fast as their legs would carry them, leaving their booty behind them.
But Mr. Vinegar, who had saved himself from the fall by clinging to a
branch, was far too frightened to go down in the dark to see what had
happened. So up in the tree he sate like a big bird until dawn came.
Then Mrs. Vinegar woke, rubbed her eyes, yawned, and said, "Where am I?"
"On the ground, lovey," answered Mr. Vinegar, scrambling down.
And when they lifted up the door, what do you think they found?
One robber squashed flat as a pancake, and forty golden guineas all
scattered about!
My goodness! How Mr. and Mrs. Vinegar jumped for joy!
"Now, Vinegar!" said his wife when they had gathered up all the gold
pieces, "I will tell you what we must do. You must go to the next
market-town and buy a cow; for, see you, money makes the mare to go,
truly; but it also goes itself. Now a cow won't run away, but will give
us milk and butter, which we can sell. So we shall live in comfort for
the rest of our days."
"What a head you have, lovey!" said Mr. Vinegar admiringly, and started
off on his errand.
"Mind you make a good bargain," bawled his wife after him.
"I always do," bawled back Mr. Vinegar. "I made a good bargain when I
married such a clever wife, and I made a better one when I shook her
down from the tree. I am the happiest man alive!"
So he trudged on, laughing and jingling the forty gold pieces in his
pocket.
Now the first thing he saw in the market was an old red cow.
"I am in luck to-day," he thought; "that is the very beast for me. I
shall be the happiest of men if I get that cow." So he went up to the
owner, jingling the gold in his pocket.
"What will you take for your cow?" he asked.
And the owner of the cow, seeing he was a simpleton, said, "What you've
got in your pocket."
"Done!" said Mr. Vinegar, handed over the forty guineas, and led off the
cow, marching her up and down the market, much against her will, to show
off his bargain.
Now, as he drove it about, proud as Punch, he noticed a man who was
playing the bagpipes. He was followed about by a crowd of children who
danced to the music, and a perfect shower of pennies fell into his cap
every time he held it out.
"Ho, ho!" thought Mr. Vinegar. "That is an easier way of earning a
livelihood than by driving about a beast of a cow! Then the feeding, and
the milking, and the churning! Ah, I should be the happiest man alive if
I had those bagpipes!"
So he went up to the musician and said, "What will you take for your
bagpipes?"
"Well," replied the musician, seeing he was a simpleton, "it is a
beautiful instrument, and I make so much money by it, that I cannot take
anything less than that red cow."
"Done!" cried Mr. Vinegar in a hurry, lest the man should repent of his
offer.
So the musician walked off with the red cow, and Mr. Vinegar tried to
play the bagpipes. But, alas and alack! though he blew till he almost
burst, not a sound could he make at first, and when he did at last, it
was such a terrific squeal and screech that all the children ran away
frightened, and the people stopped their ears.
But he went on and on, trying to play a tune, and never earning
anything, save hootings and peltings, until his fingers were almost
frozen with the cold, when of course the noise he made on the bagpipes
was worse than ever.
Then he noticed a man who had on a pair of warm gloves, and he said to
himself, "Music is impossible when one's fingers are frozen. I believe I
should be the happiest man alive if I had those gloves."
So he went up to the owner and said, "You seem, sir, to have a very good
pair of gloves." And the man replied, "Truly, sir, my hands are as warm
as toast this bitter November day."
That quite decided Mr. Vinegar, and he asked at once what the owner
would take for them; and the owner, seeing he was a simpleton, said, "As
your hands seem frozen, sir, I will, as a favour, let you have them for
your bagpipes."
"Done!" cried Mr. Vinegar, delighted, and made the exchange.
Then he set off to find his wife, quite pleased with himself. "Warm
hands, warm heart!" he thought. "I'm the happiest man alive!"
But as he trudged he grew very, very tired, and at last began to limp.
Then he saw a man coming along the road with a stout stick.
"I should be the happiest man alive if I had that stick," he thought.
"What is the use of warm hands if your feet ache!" So he said to the man
with the stick, "What will you take for your stick?" and the man,
seeing he was a simpleton, replied:
"Well, I don't want to part with my stick, but as you are so pressing
I'll oblige you, as a friend, for those warm gloves you are wearing."
"Done for you!" cried Mr. Vinegar delightedly; and trudged off with the
stick, chuckling to himself over his good bargain.
But as he went along a magpie fluttered out of the hedge and sate on a
branch in front of him, and chuckled and laughed as magpies do. "What
are you laughing at?" asked Mr. Vinegar.
"At you, forsooth!" chuckled the magpie, fluttering just a little
further. "At you, Mr. Vinegar, you foolish man--you simpleton--you
blockhead! You bought a cow for forty guineas when she wasn't worth ten,
you exchanged her for bagpipes you couldn't play--you changed the
bagpipes for a pair of gloves, and the pair of gloves for a miserable
stick. Ho, ho! Ha, ha! So you've nothing to show for your forty guineas
save a stick you might have cut in any hedge. Ah, you fool! you
simpleton! you blockhead!"
And the magpie chuckled, and chuckled, and chuckled in such guffaws,
fluttering from branch to branch as Mr. Vinegar trudged along, that at
last he flew into a violent rage and flung his stick at the bird. And
the stick stuck in a tree out of his reach; so he had to go back to his
wife without anything at all.
[Illustration: At last he flew into a violent rage and flung his stick
at the bird]
But he was glad the stick had stuck in a tree, for Mrs. Vinegar's hands
were quite hard enough.
When it was all over Mr. Vinegar said cheerfully, "You are too violent,
lovey. You broke the pickle-jar, and now you've nearly broken every bone
in my body. I think we had better turn over a new leaf and begin
afresh. I shall take service as a gardener, and you can go as a
housemaid, until we have enough money to buy a new pickle-jar. There are
as good ones in the shop as ever came out of it."
And that is the story of Mr. and Mrs. Vinegar.
[Illustration: And that is the story of Mr. and Mrs. Vinegar]
THE TRUE HISTORY OF SIR THOMAS THUMB
At the court of great King Arthur, who lived, as all know, when knights
were bold, and ladies were fair indeed, one of the most renowned of men
was the wizard Merlin. Never before or since was there such another. All
that was to be known of wizardry he knew, and his advice was ever good
and kindly.
Now once when he was travelling in the guise of a beggar, he chanced
upon an honest ploughman and his wife who, giving him a hearty welcome,
supplied him, cheerfully, with a big wooden bowl of fresh milk and some
coarse brown bread on a wooden platter. Still, though both they and the
little cottage where they dwelt were neat and tidy, Merlin noticed that
neither the husband nor the wife seemed happy; and when he asked the
cause they said it was because they had no children.
"Had I but a son, no matter if he were no bigger than my goodman's
thumb," said the poor woman, "we should be quite content."
Now this idea of a boy no bigger than a man's thumb so tickled Wizard
Merlin's fancy that he promised straight away that such a son should
come in due time to bring the good couple content. This done, he went
off at once to pay a visit to the Queen of the Fairies, since he felt
that the little people would best be able to carry out his promise. And,
sure enough, the droll fancy of a mannikin no bigger than his father's
thumb tickled the Fairy Queen also, and she set about the task at once.
So behold the ploughman and his wife as happy as King and Queen over the
tiniest of tiny babies; and all the happier because the Fairy Queen,
anxious to see the little fellow, flew in at the window, bringing with
her clothes fit for the wee mannikin to wear.
  An oak-leaf hat he had for his crown;
  His jacket was woven of thistle-down.
  His shirt was a web by spiders spun;
  His breeches of softest feathers were done.
  His stockings of red-apple rind were tyne
  With an eyelash plucked from his mother's eyne.
  His shoes were made of a mouse's skin,
  Tanned with the soft furry hair within.
Dressed in this guise he looked the prettiest little fellow ever seen,
and the Fairy Queen kissed him over and over again, and gave him the
name of Tom Thumb.
Now as he grew older--though, mind you, he never grew bigger--he was so
full of antics and tricks that he was for ever getting into trouble.
Once his mother was making a batter pudding, and Tom, wanting to see how
it was made, climbed up to the edge of the bowl. His mother was so busy
beating the batter that she didn't notice him; and when his foot
slipped, and he plumped head and ears into the bowl, she just went on
beating until the batter was light enough. Then she put it into the
pudding-cloth and set it on the fire to boil.
Now the batter had so filled poor Tom's mouth that he couldn't cry; but
no sooner did he feel the hot water than he began to struggle and kick
so much that the pudding bobbed up and down, and jumped about in such
strange fashion that the ploughman's wife thought it was bewitched, and
in a great fright flung it to the door.
Here a poor tinker passing by picked it up and put it in his wallet. But
by this time Tom had got his mouth clear of the batter, and he began
holloaing, and making such a to-do, that the tinker, even more
frightened than Tom's mother had been, threw the pudding in the road,
and ran away as fast as he could run. Luckily for Tom, this second fall
broke the pudding string and he was able to creep out, all covered with
half-cooked batter, and make his way home, where his mother, distressed
to see her little dear in such a woeful state, put him into a teacup of
water to clean him, and then tucked him up in bed.
Another time Tom's mother went to milk her red cow in the meadow and
took Tom with her, for she was ever afraid lest he should fall into
mischief when left alone. Now the wind was high, and fearful lest he
should be blown away, she tied him to a thistle-head with one of her own
long hairs, and then began to milk. But the red cow, nosing about for
something to do while she was being milked, as all cows will, spied
Tom's oak-leaf hat, and thinking it looked good, curled its tongue round
the thistle-stalk and--
There was Tom dodging the cow's teeth, and roaring as loud as he could:
"Mother! Mother! Help! Help!"
"Lawks-a-mercy-me," cried his mother, "where's the child got to now?
Where are you, you bad boy?"
"Here!" roared Tom, "in the red cow's mouth!"
With that his mother began to weep and wail, not knowing what else to
do; and Tom, hearing her, roared louder than ever. Whereat the red cow,
alarmed--and no wonder!--at the dreadful noise in her throat, opened
her mouth, and Tom dropped out, luckily into his mother's apron;
otherwise he would have been badly hurt falling so far.
Adventures like these were not Tom's fault. He could not help being so
small, but he got into dreadful trouble once for which he was entirely
to blame. This is what happened. He loved playing cherry-stones with the
big boys, and when he had lost all his own he would creep unbeknownst
into the other players' pockets or bags, and make off with cherry-stones
enough and galore to carry on the game!
Now one day it so happened that one of the boys saw Master Tom on the
point of coming out of a bag with a whole fistful of cherry-stones. So
he just drew the string of the bag tight.
"Ha! ha! Mr. Thomas Thumb," says he jeeringly, "so you were going to
pinch my cherry-stones, were you? Well! you shall have more of them than
you like." And with that he gave the cherry-stone bag such a hearty
shake that all Tom's body and legs were sadly bruised black and blue;
nor was he let out till he had promised never to steal cherry-stones
again.
So the years passed, and when Tom was a lad, still no bigger than a
thumb, his father thought he might begin to make himself useful. So he
made him a whip out of a barley straw, and set him to drive the cattle
home. But Tom, in trying to climb a furrow's ridge--which to him, of
course, was a steep hill--slipped down and lay half stunned, so that a
raven, happening to fly over, thought he was a frog, and picked him up
intending to eat him. Not relishing the morsel, however, the bird
dropped him above the battlements of a big castle that stood close to
the sea. Now the castle belonged to one Grumbo, an ill-tempered giant
who happened to be taking the air on the roof of his tower. And when Tom
dropped on his bald pate the giant put up his great hand to catch what
he thought was an impudent fly, and finding something that smelt man's
meat, he just swallowed the little fellow as he would have swallowed a
pill!
He began, however, to repent very soon, for Tom kicked and struggled in
the giant's inside as he had done in the red cow's throat until the
giant felt quite squeamish, and finally got rid of Tom by being sick
over the battlements into the sea.
And here, doubtless, would have been Tom Thumb's end by drowning, had
not a big fish, thinking that he was a shrimp, rushed at him and gulped
him down!
Now by good chance some fishermen were standing by with their nets, and
when they drew them in, the fish that had swallowed Tom was one of the
haul. Being a very fine fish it was sent to the Court kitchen, where,
when the fish was opened, out popped Tom on the dresser, as spry as
spry, to the astonishment of the cook and the scullions! Never had such
a mite of a man been seen, while his quips and pranks kept the whole
buttery in roars of laughter. What is more, he soon became the favourite
of the whole Court, and when the King went out a-riding Tom sat in the
Royal waistcoat pocket ready to amuse Royalty and the Knights of the
After a while, however, Tom wearied to see his parents again; so the
King gave him leave to go home and take with him as much money as he
could carry. Tom therefore chose a threepenny bit, and putting it into a
purse made of a water bubble, lifted it with difficulty on to his back,
and trudged away to his father's house, which was some half a mile
distant.
It took him two days and two nights to cover the ground, and he was fair
outwearied by his heavy burden ere he reached home. However, his mother
put him to rest in a walnut shell by the fire and gave him a whole hazel
nut to eat; which, sad to say, disagreed with him dreadfully. However,
he recovered in some measure, but had grown so thin and light that to
save him the trouble of walking back to the Court, his mother tied him
to a dandelion-clock, and as there was a high wind, away he went as if
on wings. Unfortunately, however, just as he was flying low in order to
alight, the Court cook, an ill-natured fellow, was coming across the
palace yard with a bowl of hot furmenty for the King's supper. Now Tom
was unskilled in the handling of dandelion horses, so what should happen
but that he rode straight into the furmenty, spilt the half of it, and
splashed the other half, scalding hot, into the cook's face.
He was in a fine rage, and going straight to King Arthur said that Tom,
at his old antics, had done it on purpose.
Now the King's favourite dish was hot furmenty; so he also fell into a
fine rage and ordered Tom to be tried for high treason. He was therefore
imprisoned in a mouse-trap, where he remained for several days tormented
by a cat, who, thinking him some new kind of mouse, spent its time in
sparring at him through the bars. At the end of a week, however, King
Arthur, having recovered the loss of the furmenty, sent for Tom and once
more received him into favour. After this Tom's life was happy and
successful. He became so renowned for his dexterity and wonderful
activity, that he was knighted, by the King under the name of Sir Thomas
Thumb, and as his clothes, what with the batter and the furmenty, to say
nothing of the insides of giants and fishes, had become somewhat shabby,
His Majesty ordered him a new suit of clothes fit for a mounted knight
to wear. He also gave him a beautiful prancing grey mouse as a charger.
It was certainly very diverting to see Tom dressed up to the nines, and
as proud as Punch.
  Of butterflies' wings his shirt was made,
  His boots of chicken hide,
  And by a nimble fairy blade,
  All learned in the tailoring trade,
  His coat was well supplied.
  A needle dangled at his side,
  And thus attired in stately pride
  A dapper mouse he used to ride.
In truth the King and all the Knights of the Round Table were ready to
expire with laughter at Tom on his fine curveting steed.
But one day, as the hunt was passing a farm-house, a big cat, lurking
about, made one spring and carried both Tom and the mouse up a tree.
Nothing daunted, Tom boldly drew his needle sword and attacked the enemy
with such fierceness that she let her prey fall. Luckily one of the
nobles caught the little fellow in his cap, otherwise he must have been
killed by the fall. As it was he became very ill, and the doctor almost
despaired of his life. However, his friend and guardian, the Queen of
the Fairies, arrived in a chariot drawn by flying mice, and then and
there carried Tom back with her to Fairyland, where, amongst folk of his
own size, he, after a time, recovered. But time runs swiftly in
Fairyland, and when Tom Thumb returned to Court he was surprised to find
that his father and mother and nearly all his old friends were dead, and
that King Thunstone reigned in King Arthur's place. So every one was
astonished at his size, and carried him as a curiosity to the Audience
Hall.
"Who art thou, mannikin?" asked King Thunstone. "Whence dost come? And
where dost live?"
To which Tom replied with a bow:
  "My name is well known.
   From the Fairies I come.
   When King Arthur shone,
   This Court was my home.
   By him I was knighted,
   In me he delighted
   --Your servant--Sir Thomas Thumb."
This address so pleased His Majesty that he ordered a little golden
chair to be made, so that Tom might sit beside him at table. Also a
little palace of gold, but a span high, with doors a bare inch wide, in
which the little fellow might take his ease.
Now King Thunstone's Queen was a very jealous woman, and could not bear
to see such honours showered on the little fellow; so she up and told
the King all sorts of bad tales about his favourite; amongst others,
that he had been saucy and rude to her.
Whereupon the King sent for Tom; but forewarned is forearmed, and
knowing by bitter experience the danger of royal displeasure, Tom hid
himself in an empty snail-shell, where he lay till he was nigh starved.
Then seeing a fine large butterfly on a dandelion close by, he climbed
up and managed to get astride it. No sooner had he gained his seat than
the butterfly was off, hovering from tree to tree, from flower to
flower.
At last the royal gardener saw it and gave chase, then the nobles joined
in the hunt, even the King himself, and finally the Queen, who forgot
her anger in the merriment. Hither and thither they ran, trying in vain
to catch the pair, and almost expiring with laughter, until poor Tom,
dizzy with so much fluttering, and doubling, and flittering, fell from
his seat into a watering-pot, where he was nearly drowned.
So they all agreed he must be forgiven, because he had afforded them so
much amusement.
[Illustration: A spider one day attacked him]
Thus Tom was once more in favour; but he did not live long to enjoy his
good luck, for a spider one day attacked him, and though he fought well,
the creature's poisonous breath proved too much for him; he fell dead on
the ground where he stood, and the spider soon sucked every drop of his
blood.
Thus ended Sir Thomas Thumb; but the King and the Court were so sorry at
the loss of their little favourite that they went into mourning for him.
And they put a fine white marble monument over his grave whereon was
carven the following epitaph:
  Here lyes Tom Thumb, King Arthur's Knight,
  Who died by a spider's fell despite.
  He was well known in Arthur's Court,
  Where he afforded gallant sport.
  He rode at tilt and tournament,
  And on a mouse a-hunting went.
  Alive he filled the Court with mirth,
  His death to sadness must give birth.
  So wipe your eyes and shake your head,
  And say, "Alas, Tom Thumb is dead!"
HENNY-PENNY
One day Henny-penny was picking up corn in the rickyard when--whack!--an
acorn hit her upon the head. "Goodness gracious me!" said Henny-penny,
"the sky's a-going to fall; I must go and tell the King."
So she went along, and she went along, and she went along, till she met
Cocky-locky. "Where are you going, Henny-penny?" says Cocky-locky. "Oh!
I'm going to tell the King the sky's a-falling," says Henny-penny. "May
I come with you?" says Cocky-locky. "Certainly," says Henny-penny. So
Henny-penny and Cocky-locky went to tell the King the sky was falling.
They went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they met
Ducky-daddles. "Where are you going to, Henny-penny and Cocky-locky?"
says Ducky-daddles. "Oh! we're going to tell the King the sky's
a-falling," said Henny-penny and Cocky-locky. "May I come with you?"
says Ducky-daddles. "Certainly," said Henny-penny and Cocky-locky. So
Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, and Ducky-daddles went to tell the King the
sky was a-falling.
So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they
met Goosey-poosey. "Where are you going to, Henny-penny, Cocky-locky,
and Ducky-daddles?" said Goosey-poosey. "Oh! we're going to tell the
King the sky's a-falling," said Henny-penny and Cocky-locky and
Ducky-daddles. "May I come with you?" said Goosey-poosey. "Certainly,"
said Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, and Ducky-daddles. So Henny-penny,
Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, and Goosey-poosey went to tell the King the
met Turkey-lurkey. "Where are you going, Henny-penny, Cocky-locky,
Ducky-daddles, and Goosey-poosey?" says Turkey-lurkey. "Oh! we're going
to tell the King the sky's a-falling," said Henny-penny, Cocky-locky,
Ducky-daddles, and Goosey-poosey. "May I come with you, Henny-penny,
Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, and Goosey-poosey?" said Turkey-lurkey. "Oh,
certainly, Turkey-lurkey," said Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles,
and Goosey-poosey. So Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles,
Goosey-poosey, and Turkey-lurkey all went to tell the King the sky was
a-falling.
met Foxy-woxy, and Foxy-woxy said to Henny-penny, Cocky-locky,
Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, and Turkey-lurkey, "Where are you going,
Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, and
Turkey-lurkey?" And Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles,
Goosey-poosey, and Turkey-lurkey said to Foxy-woxy, "We're going to tell
the King the sky's a-falling." "Oh! but this is not the way to the King,
Turkey-lurkey," says Foxy-woxy; "I know the proper way; shall I show it
you?" "Oh, certainly, Foxy-woxy," said Henny-penny, Cocky-locky,
Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, and Turkey-lurkey. So Henny-penny,
Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, Turkey-lurkey, and Foxy-woxy
all went to tell the King the sky was a-falling. So they went along, and
they went along, and they went along, till they came to a narrow and
dark hole. Now this was the door of Foxy-woxy's burrow. But Foxy-woxy
said to Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, and
Turkey-lurkey, "This is the short cut to the King's palace: you'll
soon get there if you follow me. I will go first and you come after,
Turkey-lurkey." "Why, of course, certainly, without doubt, why not?"
said Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, and
Turkey-lurkey.
[Illustration: "I will go first and you come after, Henny-penny,
Cocky-locky Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, and Turkey-lurkey"]
So Foxy-woxy went into his burrow, and he didn't go very far but turned
round to wait for Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles,
Goosey-poosey, and Turkey-lurkey. Now Turkey-lurkey was the first to go
through the dark hole into the burrow. He hadn't got far when--
"Hrumph!"
Foxy-woxy snapped off Turkey-lurkey's head and threw his body over his
left shoulder. Then Goosey-poosey went in, and--
[Illustration: So she escaped]
Off went her head and Goosey-poosey was thrown beside Turkey-lurkey.
Then Ducky-daddles waddled down, and--
Foxy-woxy had snapped off Ducky-daddles' head and Ducky-daddles was
thrown alongside Turkey-lurkey and Goosey-poosey. Then Cocky-locky
strutted down into the burrow, and he hadn't gone far when--
But Cocky-locky will always crow whether you want him to do so or not,
and so he had just time for one "Cock-a-doo-dle d--" before he went to
join Turkey-lurkey, Goosey-poosey, and Ducky-daddles over Foxy-woxy's
shoulders.
Now when Henny-penny, who had just got into the dark burrow, heard
Cocky-locky crow, she said to herself:
"My goodness! it must be dawn. Time for me to lay my egg."
So she turned round and bustled off to her nest; so she escaped, but she
never told the King the sky was falling!
[Illustration: They thanked her and said good-bye, and she went on her
journey.]
THE THREE HEADS OF THE WELL
Once upon a time there reigned a King in Colchester, valiant, strong,
wise, famous as a good ruler.
But in the midst of his glory his dear Queen died, leaving him with a
daughter just touching woman's estate; and this maiden was renowned, far
and wide, for beauty, kindness, grace. Now strange things happen, and
the King of Colchester, hearing of a lady who had immense riches, had a
mind to marry her, though she was old, ugly, hook-nosed, and
ill-tempered; and though she was, furthermore, possessed of a daughter
as ugly as herself. None could give the reason why, but only a few weeks
after the death of his dear Queen, the King brought this loathly bride
to Court, and married her with great pomp and festivities. Now the very
first thing she did was to poison the King's mind against his own
beautiful, kind, gracious daughter, of whom, naturally, the ugly Queen
and her ugly daughter were dreadfully jealous.
Now when the young Princess found that even her father had turned
against her, she grew weary of Court life, and longed to get away from
it; so, one day, happening to meet the King alone in the garden, she
went down on her knees, and begged and prayed him to give her some help,
and let her go out into the world to seek her fortune. To this the King
agreed, and told his consort to fit the girl out for her enterprise in
proper fashion. But the jealous woman only gave her a canvas bag of
brown bread and hard cheese, with a bottle of small-beer.
Though this was but a pitiful dowry for a King's daughter, the Princess
was too proud to complain; so she took it, returned her thanks, and set
off on her journey through woods and forests, by rivers and lakes, over
mountain and valley.
At last she came to a cave at the mouth of which, on a stone, sate an
old, old man with a white beard.
"Good morrow, fair damsel," he said; "whither away so fast?"
"Reverend father," replies she, "I go to seek my fortune."
"And what hast thou for dowry, fair damsel," said he, "in thy bag and
bottle?"
"Bread and cheese and small-beer, father," says she, smiling. "Will it
please you to partake of either?"
"With all my heart," says he, and when she pulled out her provisions he
ate them nearly all. But once again she made no complaint, but bade him
eat what he needed, and welcome.
Now when he had finished he gave her many thanks, and said:
"For your beauty, and your kindness, and your grace, take this wand.
There is a thick thorny hedge before you which seems impassable. But
strike it thrice with this wand, saying each time, 'Please, hedge, let
me through,' and it will open a pathway for you. Then, when you come to
a well, sit down on the brink of it; do not be surprised at anything you
may see, but, whatever you are asked to do, that do!"
So saying the old man went into the cave, and she went on her way. After
a while she came to a high, thick thorny hedge; but when she struck it
three times with the wand, saying, "Please, hedge, let me through," it
opened a wide pathway for her. So she came to the well, on the brink of
which she sate down, and no sooner had she done so, than a golden head
without any body came up through the water, singing as it came:
  "Wash me, and comb me, lay me on a bank to dry
   Softly and prettily to watch the passers-by."
"Certainly," she said, pulling out her silver comb. Then, placing the
head on her lap, she began to comb the golden hair. When she had combed
it, she lifted the golden head softly, and laid it on a primrose bank to
dry. No sooner had she done this than another golden head appeared,
singing as it came:
"Certainly," says she, and after combing the golden hair, placed the
golden head softly on the primrose bank, beside the first one.
Then came a third head out of the well, and it said the same thing:
"With all my heart," says she graciously, and after taking the head on
her lap, and combing its golden hair with her silver comb, there were
the three golden heads in a row on the primrose bank. And she sate down
to rest herself and looked at them, they were so quaint and pretty; and
as she rested she cheerfully ate and drank the meagre portion of the
brown bread, hard cheese, and small-beer which the old man had left to
her; for, though she was a king's daughter, she was too proud to
complain.
Then the first head spoke. "Brothers, what shall we weird for this
damsel who has been so gracious unto us? I weird her to be so beautiful
that she shall charm every one she meets."
"And I," said the second head, "weird her a voice that shall exceed the
nightingale's in sweetness."
"And I," said the third head, "weird her to be so fortunate that she
shall marry the greatest King that reigns."
"Thank you with all my heart," says she; "but don't you think I had
better put you back in the well before I go on? Remember you are golden,
and the passers-by might steal you."
To this they agreed; so she put them back. And when they had thanked
her for her kind thought and said good-bye, she went on her journey.
Now she had not travelled far before she came to a forest where the King
of the country was hunting with his nobles, and as the gay cavalcade
passed down the glade she stood back to avoid them; but the King caught
sight of her, and drew up his horse, fairly amazed at her beauty.
"Fair maid," he said, "who art thou, and whither goest thou through the
forest thus alone?"
"I am the King of Colchester's daughter, and I go to seek my fortune,"
says she, and her voice was sweeter than the nightingale's.
Then the King jumped from his horse, being so struck by her that he felt
it would be impossible to live without her, and falling on his knee
begged and prayed her to marry him without delay.
And he begged and prayed so well that at last she consented. So, with
all courtesy, he mounted her on his horse behind him, and commanding the
hunt to follow, he returned to his palace, where the wedding festivities
took place with all possible pomp and merriment. Then, ordering out the
royal chariot, the happy pair started to pay the King of Colchester a
bridal visit: and you may imagine the surprise and delight with which,
after so short an absence, the people of Colchester saw their beloved,
beautiful, kind, and gracious princess return in a chariot all gemmed
with gold, as the bride of the most powerful King in the world. The
bells rang out, flags flew, drums beat, the people huzzaed, and all was
gladness, save for the ugly Queen and her ugly daughter, who were ready
to burst with envy and malice; for, see you, the despised maiden was now
above them both, and went before them at every Court ceremonial.
So, after the visit was ended, and the young King and his bride had gone
back to their own country, there to live happily ever after, the ugly
ill-natured princess said to her mother, the ugly Queen:
"I also will go into the world and seek my fortune. If that drab of a
girl with her mincing ways got so much, what may I not get?"
So her mother agreed, and furnished her forth with silken dresses and
furs, and gave her as provisions sugar, almonds, and sweetmeats of every
variety, besides a large flagon of Malaga sack. Altogether a right royal
dowry.
Armed with these she set forth, following the same road as her
step-sister. Thus she soon came upon the old man with a white beard, who
was seated on a stone by the mouth of a cave.
"Good morrow," says he. "Whither away so fast?"
"What's that to you, old man?" she replied rudely.
"And what hast thou for dowry in bag and bottle?" he asked quietly.
"Good things with which you shall not be troubled," she answered pertly.
"Wilt thou not spare an old man something?" he said.
[Illustration: The thorns closed in around her so that she was all
scratched and torn]
Then she laughed. "Not a bite, not a sup, lest they should choke you:
though that would be small matter to me," she replied, with a toss of
her head.
"Then ill luck go with thee," remarked the old man as he rose and went
into the cave.
So she went on her way, and after a time came to the thick thorny hedge,
and seeing what she thought was a gap in it, she tried to pass through;
but no sooner had she got well into the middle of the hedge than the
thorns closed in around her so that she was all scratched and torn
before she won her way. Thus, streaming with blood, she went on to the
well, and seeing water, sate on the brink intending to cleanse herself.
But just as she dipped her hands, up came a golden head singing as it
came:
  "Wash me, and comb me, lay me on the bank to dry
"A likely story," says she. "I'm going to wash myself." And with that
she gave the head such a bang with her bottle that it bobbed below the
water. But it came up again, and so did a second head, singing as it
"Not I," scoffs she. "I'm going to wash my hands and face and have my
dinner." So she fetches the second head a cruel bang with the bottle,
and both heads ducked down in the water.
But when they came up again all draggled and dripping, the third head
came also, singing as it came:
By this time the ugly princess had cleansed herself, and, seated on the
primrose bank, had her mouth full of sugar and almonds.
"Not I," says she as well as she could. "I'm not a washerwoman nor a
barber. So take that for your washing and combing."
And with that, having finished the Malaga sack, she flung the empty
bottle at the three heads.
But this time they didn't duck. They looked at each other and said, "How
shall we weird this rude girl for her bad manners?" Then the first head
"I weird that to her ugliness shall be added blotches on her face."
And the second head said:
"I weird that she shall ever be hoarse as a crow and speak as if she had
her mouth full."
Then the third head said:
"And I weird that she shall be glad to marry a cobbler."
Then the three heads sank into the well and were no more seen, and the
ugly princess went on her way. But, lo and behold! when she came to a
town, the children ran from her ugly blotched face screaming with
fright, and when she tried to tell them she was the King of Colchester's
daughter, her voice squeaked like a corn-crake's, was hoarse as a
crow's, and folk could not understand a word she said, because she spoke
as if her mouth was full!
Now in the town there happened to be a cobbler who not long before had
mended the shoes of a poor old hermit; and the latter, having no money,
had paid for the job by the gift of a wonderful ointment which would
cure blotches on the face, and a bottle of medicine that would banish
any hoarseness.
So, seeing the miserable, ugly princess in great distress, he went up to
her and gave her a few drops out of his bottle; and then understanding
from her rich attire and clearer speech that she was indeed a King's
daughter, he craftily said that if she would take him for a husband he
would undertake to cure her.
"Anything! Anything!" sobbed the miserable princess.
So they were married, and the cobbler straightway set off with his bride
to visit the King of Colchester. But the bells did not ring, the drums
did not beat, and the people, instead of huzzaing, burst into loud
guffaws at the cobbler in leather, and his wife in silks and satins.
As for the ugly Queen, she was so enraged and disappointed that she went
mad, and hanged herself in wrath. Whereupon the King, really pleased at
getting rid of her so soon, gave the cobbler a hundred pounds and bade
him go about his business with his ugly bride.
Which he did quite contentedly, for a hundred pounds means much to a
poor cobbler. So they went to a remote part of the kingdom and lived
unhappily for many years, he cobbling shoes, and she spinning the thread
for him.
MR. FOX
Lady Mary was young and Lady Mary was fair, and she had more lovers than
she could count on the fingers of both hands.
She lived with her two brothers, who were very proud and very fond of
their beautiful sister, and very anxious that she should choose well
amongst her many suitors.
Now amongst them there was a certain Mr. Fox, handsome and young and
rich; and though nobody quite knew who he was, he was so gallant and so
gay that every one liked him. And he wooed Lady Mary so well that at
last she promised to marry him. But though he talked much of the
beautiful home to which he would take her, and described the castle and
all the wonderful things that furnished it, he never offered to show it
to her, neither did he invite Lady Mary's brothers to see it.
Now this seemed to her very strange indeed; and, being a lass of spirit,
she made up her mind to see the castle if she could.
So one day, just before the wedding, when she knew Mr. Fox would be
away seeing the lawyers with her brothers, she just kilted up her skirts
and set out unbeknownst--for, see you, the whole household was busy
preparing for the marriage feastings--to see for herself what Mr. Fox's
beautiful castle was like.
After many searchings, and much travelling, she found it at last; and a
fine strong building it was, with high walls and a deep moat to it. A
bit frowning and gloomy, but when she came up to the wide gateway she
saw these words carven over the arch:
                BE BOLD--BE BOLD.
So she plucked up courage, and the gate being open, went through it and
found herself in a wide, empty, open courtyard. At the end of this was a
smaller door, and over this was carven:
        BE BOLD, BE BOLD; BUT NOT TOO BOLD.
So she went through it to a wide, empty hall, and up the wide, empty
staircase. Now at the top of the staircase there was a wide, empty
gallery at one end of which were wide windows with the sunlight
streaming through them from a beautiful garden, and at the other end a
narrow door, over the archway of which was carven:
    BE BOLD, BE BOLD; BUT NOT TOO BOLD,
    LEST THAT YOUR HEART'S BLOOD SHOULD RUN COLD.
Now Lady Mary was a lass of spirit, and so, of course, she turned her
back on the sunshine, and opened the narrow, dark door. And there she
was in a narrow, dark passage. But at the end there was a chink of
light. So she went forward and put her eye to the chink--and what do you
think she saw?
Why! a wide saloon lit with many candles, and all round it, some hanging
by their necks, some seated on chairs, some lying on the floor, were the
skeletons and bodies of numbers of beautiful young maidens in their
wedding-dresses that were all stained with blood.
Now Lady Mary, for all she was a lass of spirit, and brave as brave,
could not look for long on such a horrid sight, so she turned and fled.
Down the dark narrow passage, through the dark narrow door (which she
did not forget to close behind her), and along the wide gallery she fled
like a hare, and was just going down the wide stairs into the wide hall
when, what did she see, through the window, but Mr. Fox dragging a
beautiful young lady across the wide courtyard! There was nothing for
it, Lady Mary decided, but to hide herself as quickly and as best she
might; so she fled faster down the wide stairs, and hid herself behind a
big wine-butt that stood in a corner of the wide hall. She was only just
in time, for there at the wide door was Mr. Fox dragging the poor young
maiden along by the hair; and he dragged her across the wide hall and up
the wide stairs. And when she clutched at the bannisters to stop
herself, Mr. Fox cursed and swore dreadfully; and at last he drew his
sword and brought it down so hard on the poor young lady's wrist that
the hand, cut off, jumped up into the air so that the diamond ring on
the finger flashed in the sunlight as it fell, of all places in the
world, into Lady Mary's very lap as she crouched behind the wine-butt!
Then she was fair frightened, thinking Mr. Fox would be sure to find
her; but after looking about a little while in vain (for, of course, he
coveted the diamond ring), he continued his dreadful task of dragging
the poor, beautiful young maiden upstairs to the horrid chamber,
intending, doubtless, to return when he had finished his loathly work,
and seek for the hand.
But by that time Lady Mary had fled; for no sooner did she hear the
awful, dragging noise pass into the gallery, than she upped and ran for
dear life--through the wide door with
            BE BOLD, BE BOLD; BUT NOT TOO BOLD
engraven over the arch, across the wide courtyard past the wide gate
with
                BE BOLD--BE BOLD
engraven over it, never stopping, never thinking till she reached her
own chamber. And all the while the hand with the diamond ring lay in her
kilted lap.
Now the very next day, when Mr. Fox and Lady Mary's brothers returned
from the lawyers, the marriage-contract had to be signed. And all the
neighbourhood was asked to witness it and partake of a splendid
breakfast. And there was Lady Mary in bridal array, and there was Mr.
Fox, looking so gay and so gallant. He was seated at the table just
opposite Lady Mary, and he looked at her and said:
"How pale you are this morning, dear heart."
Then Lady Mary looked at him quietly and said, "Yes, dear sir! I had a
bad night's rest, for I had horrible dreams."
Then Mr. Fox smiled and said, "Dreams go by contraries, dear heart; but
tell me your dream, and your sweet voice will speed the time till I can
call you mine."
"I dreamed," said Lady Mary, with a quiet smile, and her eyes were
clear, "that I went yesterday to seek the castle that is to be my home,
and I found it in the woods with high walls and a deep dark moat. And
over the gateway were carven these words:
                   BE BOLD--BE BOLD."
Then Mr. Fox spoke in a hurry. "But it is not so--nor it was not so."
"Then I crossed the wide courtyard and went through a wide door over
which was carven:
            BE BOLD, BE BOLD; BUT NOT TOO BOLD,"
went on Lady Mary, still smiling, and her voice was cold; "but, of
course, it is not so, and it was not so."
And Mr. Fox said nothing; he sate like a stone.
"Then I dreamed," continued Lady Mary, still smiling, though her eyes
were stern, "that I passed through a wide hall and up a wide stair and
along a wide gallery until I came to a dark narrow door, and over it was
carven:
     LEST THAT YOUR HEART'S BLOOD SHOULD RUN COLD.
"But it is not so, of course, and it was not so."
And Mr. Fox said nothing; he sate frozen.
"Then I dreamed that I opened the door and went down a dark narrow
passage," said Lady Mary, still smiling, though her voice was ice. "And
at the end of the passage there was a door, and the door had a chink in
it. And through the chink I saw a wide saloon lit with many candles, and
all round it were the bones and bodies of poor dead maidens, their
clothes all stained with blood; but of course it is not so, and it was
not so."
By this time all the neighbours were looking Mr. Fox-ways with all their
eyes, while he sate silent.
But Lady Mary went on, and her smiling lips were set:
"Then I dreamed that I ran downstairs and had just time to hide myself
when you, Mr. Fox, came in dragging a young lady by the hair. And the
sunlight glittered on her diamond ring as she clutched the stair-rail,
and you out with your sword and cut off the poor lady's hand."
Then Mr. Fox rose in his seat stonily and glared about him as if to
escape, and his eye-teeth showed like a fox beset by the dogs, and he
grew pale.
And he said, trying to smile, though his whispering voice could scarcely
be heard:
"But it is not so, dear heart, and it was not so, and God forbid it
should be so!"
Then Lady Mary rose in her seat also, and the smile left her face, and
her voice rang as she cried:
  "But it is so, and it was so;
   Here's hand and ring I have to show."
[Illustration: Many's the beating he had from the broomstick or the
ladle]
And with that she pulled out the poor dead hand with the glittering
ring from her bosom and pointed it straight at Mr. Fox.
At this all the company rose, and drawing their swords cut Mr. Fox to
And served him very well right.
DICK WHITTINGTON AND HIS CAT
More than five hundred years ago there was a little boy named Dick
Whittington, and this is true. His father and mother died when he was
too young to work, and so poor little Dick was very badly off. He was
quite glad to get the parings of the potatoes to eat and a dry crust of
bread now and then, and more than that he did not often get, for the
village where he lived was a very poor one and the neighbours were not
able to spare him much.
Now the country folk in those days thought that the people of London
were all fine ladies and gentlemen, and that there was singing and
dancing all the day long, and so rich were they there that even the
streets, they said, were paved with gold. Dick used to sit by and listen
while all these strange tales of the wealth of London were told, and it
made him long to go and live there and have plenty to eat and fine
clothes to wear, instead of the rags and hard fare that fell to his lot
in the country.
So one day when a great waggon with eight horses stopped on its way
through the village, Dick made friends with the waggoner and begged to
be taken with him to London. The man felt sorry for poor little Dick
when he heard that he had no father or mother to take care of him, and
saw how ragged and how badly in need of help he was. So he agreed to
take him, and off they set.
How far it was and how many days they took over the journey I do not
know, but in due time Dick found himself in the wonderful city which he
had heard so much of and pictured to himself so grandly. But oh! how
disappointed he was when he got there. How dirty it was! And the people,
how unlike the gay company, with music and singing, that he had dreamt
of! He wandered up and down the streets, one after another, until he was
tired out, but not one did he find that was paved with gold. Dirt in
plenty he could see, but none of the gold that he thought to have put in
his pockets as fast as he chose to pick it up.
[Illustration: Dick finds that the streets of London are not paved with
gold]
Little Dick ran about till he was tired and it was growing dark. And at
last he sat himself down in a corner and fell asleep. When morning came
he was very cold and hungry, and though he asked every one he met to
help him, only one or two gave him a halfpenny to buy some bread. For
two or three days he lived in the streets in this way, only just able to
keep himself alive, when he managed to get some work to do in a
hayfield, and that kept him for a short time longer, till the haymaking
was over.
After this he was as badly off as ever, and did not know where to turn.
One day in his wanderings he lay down to rest in the doorway of the
house of a rich merchant whose name was Fitzwarren. But here he was soon
seen by the cook-maid, who was an unkind, bad-tempered woman, and she
cried out to him to be off. "Lazy rogue," she called him; and she said
she'd precious quick throw some dirty dishwater over him, boiling hot,
if he didn't go. However, just then Mr. Fitzwarren himself came home to
dinner, and when he saw what was happening, he asked Dick why he was
lying there. "You're old enough to be at work, my boy," he said. "I'm
afraid you have a mind to be lazy."
"Indeed, sir," said Dick to him, "indeed that is not so"; and he told
him how hard he had tried to get work to do, and how ill he was for want
of food. Dick, poor fellow, was now so weak that though he tried to
stand he had to lie down again, for it was more than three days since he
had had anything to eat at all. The kind merchant gave orders for him to
be taken into the house and gave him a good dinner, and then he said
that he was to be kept, to do what work he could to help the cook.
And now Dick would have been happy enough in this good family if it had
not been for the ill-natured cook, who did her best to make life a
burden to him. Night and morning she was for ever scolding him. Nothing
he did was good enough. It was "Look sharp here" and "Hurry up there,"
and there was no pleasing her. And many's the beating he had from the
broomstick or the ladle, or whatever else she had in her hand.
At last it came to the ears of Miss Alice, Mr. Fitzwarren's daughter,
how badly the cook was treating poor Dick. And she told the cook that
she would quickly lose her place if she didn't treat him more kindly,
for Dick had become quite a favourite with the family.
After that the cook's behaviour was a little better, but Dick still had
another hardship that he bore with difficulty. For he slept in a garret
where were so many holes in the walls and the floor that every night as
he lay in bed the room was overrun with rats and mice, and sometimes he
could hardly sleep a wink. One day when he had earned a penny for
cleaning a gentleman's shoes, he met a little girl with a cat in her
arms, and asked whether she would not sell it to him. "Yes, she would,"
she said, though the cat was such a good mouser that she was sorry to
part with her. This just suited Dick, who kept pussy up in his garret,
feeding her on scraps of his own dinner that he saved for her every day.
In a little while he had no more bother with the rats and mice. Puss
soon saw to that, and he slept sound every night.
Soon after this Mr. Fitzwarren had a ship ready to sail; and as it was
his custom that all his servants should be given a chance of good
fortune as well as himself, he called them all into the counting-house
and asked them what they would send out.
They all had something that they were willing to venture except poor
Dick, who had neither money nor goods, and so could send nothing. For
this reason he did not come into the room with the rest. But Miss Alice
guessed what was the matter, and ordered him to be called in. She then
said, "I will lay down some money for him out of my own purse"; but her
father told her that would not do, for it must be something of his own.
When Dick heard this he said, "I have nothing whatever but a cat, which
I bought for a penny some time ago."
"Go, my boy, fetch your cat then," said his master, "and let her go."
Dick went upstairs and fetched poor puss, but there were tears in his
eyes when he gave her to the captain. "For," he said, "I shall now be
kept awake all night by the rats and mice." All the company laughed at
Dick's odd venture, and Miss Alice, who felt sorry for him, gave him
some money to buy another cat.
Now this, and other marks of kindness shown him by Miss Alice, made the
ill-tempered cook jealous of poor Dick, and she began to use him more
cruelly than ever, and was always making game of him for sending his cat
to sea. "What do you think your cat will sell for?" she'd ask. "As much
money as would buy a stick to beat you with?"
At last poor Dick could not bear this usage any longer, and he thought
he would run away. So he made a bundle of his things--he hadn't
many--and started very early in the morning, on All-hallows Day, the
first of November. He walked as far as Holloway, and there he sat down
to rest on a stone, which to this day, they say, is called
"Whittington's Stone," and began to wonder to himself which road he
should take.
[Illustration: Dick Whittington hears Bow Bells]
While he was thinking what he should do the Bells of Bow Church in
Cheapside began to chime, and as they rang he fancied that they were
singing over and over again:
  "Turn again, Whittington,
   Lord Mayor of London."
"Lord Mayor of London!" said he to himself. "Why, to be sure, wouldn't I
put up with almost anything now to be Lord Mayor of London, and ride in
a fine coach, when I grow to be a man! Well, I'll go back, and think
nothing of the cuffing and scolding of the cross old cook if I am to be
Lord Mayor of London at last."
So back he went, and he was lucky enough to get into the house and set
about his work before the cook came down.
But now you must hear what befell Mrs. Puss all this while. The ship
Unicorn that she was on was a long time at sea, and the cat made
herself useful, as she would, among the unwelcome rats that lived on
board too. At last the ship put into harbour on the coast of Barbary,
where the only people are the Moors. They had never before seen a ship
from England, and flocked in numbers to see the sailors, whose different
colour and foreign dress were a great wonder to them. They were soon
eager to buy the goods with which the ship was laden, and patterns were
sent ashore for the King to see. He was so much pleased with them that
he sent for the captain to come to the palace, and honoured him with an
invitation to dinner. But no sooner were they seated, as is the custom
there, on the fine rugs and carpets that covered the floor, than great
numbers of rats and mice came scampering in, swarming over all the
dishes, and helping themselves from all the good things there were to
eat. The captain was amazed, and wondered whether they didn't find such
a pest most unpleasant.
[Illustration: When Puss saw the rats and mice she didn't wait to be
told]
"Oh yes," said they, "it was so, and the King would give half his
treasure to be freed of them, for they not only spoil his dinner, but
they even attack him in his bed at night, so that a watch has to be kept
while he is sleeping, for fear of them."
The captain was overjoyed; he thought at once of poor Dick Whittington
and his cat, and said he had a creature on board ship that would soon do
for all these vermin if she were there. Of course, when the King heard
this he was eager to possess this wonderful animal.
"Bring it to me at once," he said; "for the vermin are dreadful, and if
only it will do what you say, I will load your ship with gold and jewels
in exchange for it."
The captain, who knew his business, took care not to underrate the value
of Dick's cat. He told His Majesty how inconvenient it would be to part
with her, as when she was gone the rats might destroy the goods in the
ship; however, to oblige the King, he would fetch her.
"Oh, make haste, do!" cried the Queen; "I, too, am all impatience to see
this dear creature."
Off went the captain, while another dinner was got ready. He took Puss
under his arm and got back to the palace just in time to see the carpet
covered with rats and mice once again. When Puss saw them, she didn't
wait to be told, but jumped out of the captain's arms, and in no time
almost all the rats and mice were dead at her feet, while the rest of
them had scuttled off to their holes in fright.
The King was delighted to get rid so easily of such an intolerable
plague, and the Queen desired that the animal who had done them such a
service might be brought to her. Upon which the captain called out,
"Puss, puss, puss," and she came running to him. Then he presented her
to the Queen, who was rather afraid at first to touch a creature who had
made such a havoc with her claws. However, when the captain called her,
"Pussy, pussy," and began to stroke her, the Queen also ventured to
touch her and cried, "Putty, putty," in imitation of the captain, for
she hadn't learned to speak English. He then put her on to the Queen's
lap, where she purred and played with Her Majesty's hand and was soon
The King having seen what Mrs. Puss could do, and learning that her
kittens would soon stock the whole country, and keep it free from rats,
after bargaining with the captain for the whole ship's cargo, then gave
him ten times as much for the cat as all the rest amounted to.
The captain then said farewell to the court of Barbary, and after a fair
voyage reached London again with his precious load of gold and jewels
safe and sound.
One morning early Mr. Fitzwarren had just come to his counting-house and
settled himself at the desk to count the cash, when there came a knock
at the door. "Who's there?" said he. "A friend," replied a voice. "I
come with good news of your ship the Unicorn." The merchant in haste
opened the door, and who were there but the ship's captain and the mate,
bearing a chest of jewels and a bill of lading. When he had looked this
over he lifted his eyes and thanked heaven for sending him such a
prosperous voyage.
The honest captain next told him all about the cat, and showed him the
rich present the King had sent for her to poor Dick. Rejoicing on behalf
of Dick as much as he had done over his own good fortune, he called out
to his servants to come and to bring up Dick:
  "Go fetch him, and we'll tell him of his fame;
   Pray call him Mr. Whittington by name."
The servants, some of them, hesitated at this, and said so great a
treasure was too much for a lad like Dick; but Mr. Fitzwarren now showed
himself the good man that he was and refused to deprive him of the value
of a single penny. "God forbid!" he cried. "It's all his own, and he
shall have it, to a farthing."
He then sent for Dick, who at the moment was scouring pots for the cook
and was black with dirt. He tried to excuse himself from coming into the
room in such a plight, but the merchant made him come, and had a chair
set for him. And he then began to think they must be making game of him,
so he begged them not to play tricks on a poor simple boy, but to let
him go downstairs again back to his work in the scullery.
"Indeed, Mr. Whittington," said the merchant, "we are all quite in
earnest with you, and I most heartily rejoice at the news that these
gentlemen have brought. For the captain has sold your cat to the King of
Barbary, and brings you in return for her more riches than I possess in
the whole world; and may you long enjoy them!"
Mr. Fitzwarren then told the men to open the great treasure they had
brought with them, saying, "There is nothing more now for Mr.
Whittington to do but to put it in some place of safety."
Poor Dick hardly knew how to behave himself for joy. He begged his
master to take what part of it he pleased, since he owed it all to his
kindness. "No, no," answered Mr. Fitzwarren, "this all belongs to you;
and I have no doubt that you will use it well."
Dick next begged his mistress, and then Miss Alice, to accept a part of
his good fortune, but they would not, and at the same time told him what
great joy they felt at his great success. But he was far too
kind-hearted to keep it all to himself; so he made a present to the
captain, the mate, and the rest of Mr. Fitzwarren's servants; and even
to his old enemy, the cross cook.
After this Mr. Fitzwarren advised him to send for a tailor and get
himself dressed like a gentleman, and told him he was welcome to live in
his house till he could provide himself with a better.
When Whittington's face was washed, his hair curled, and he was dressed
in a smart suit of clothes, he was just as handsome and fine a young man
as any who visited at Mr. Fitzwarren's, and so thought fair Alice
Fitzwarren, who had once been so kind to him and looked upon him with
pity. And now she felt he was quite fit to be her sweetheart, and none
the less, no doubt, because Whittington was always thinking what he
could do to please her, and making her the prettiest presents that could
be.
Mr. Fitzwarren soon saw which way the wind blew, and ere long proposed
to join them in marriage, and to this they both readily agreed. A day
for the wedding was soon fixed; and they were attended to church by the
Lord Mayor, the court of aldermen, the sheriffs, and a great number of
the richest merchants in London, whom they afterwards treated with a
magnificent feast.
History tells us that Mr. Whittington and his lady lived in great
splendour, and were very happy. They had several children. He was
Sheriff, and thrice Lord Mayor of London, and received the honour of
knighthood from Henry V.
After the King's conquest of France, Sir Richard Whittington entertained
him and the Queen at dinner at the Mansion House in so sumptuous a
manner that the King said, "Never had Prince such a subject!" To which
Sir Richard replied, "Never had subject such a Prince."
THE OLD WOMAN AND HER PIG
An old woman was sweeping her house, and she found a little crooked
sixpence. "What," said she, "shall I do with this little sixpence? I
will go to market, and buy a little pig."
So she bought a little pig; but as she was coming home, she came to a
stile, and the piggy would not go over the stile.
[Illustration: The old woman and her pig]
She went a little further, and she met a dog. So she said to him, "Dog!
dog! bite pig; piggy won't go over the stile; and I shan't get home till
midnight." But the dog wouldn't.
She went a little further, and she met a stick. So she said, "Stick!
stick! beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and
I shan't get home till midnight." But the stick wouldn't.
She went a little further, and she met a fire. So she said, "Fire! fire!
burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; pig won't get over
the stile; and I shan't get home till midnight." But the fire wouldn't.
She went a little further, and she met some water. So she said, "Water!
water! quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog
won't bite pig; pig won't get over the stile; and I shan't get home till
midnight." But the water wouldn't.
She went a little further, and she met an ox. So she said, "Ox! ox!
drink water; water won't quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't
beat dog; dog won't bite pig; pig won't get over the stile; and I shan't
get home till midnight." But the ox wouldn't.
She went a little further, and she met a butcher. So she said, "Butcher!
butcher! kill ox; ox won't drink water; water won't quench fire; fire
won't burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; pig won't
get over the stile; and I shan't get home till midnight." But the
butcher wouldn't.
She went a little further, and she met a rope. So she said, "Rope! rope!
hang butcher; butcher won't kill ox; ox won't drink water; water won't
quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite
pig; pig won't get over the stile; and I shan't get home till
midnight." But the rope wouldn't.
She went a little further, and she met a rat. So she said, "Rat! rat!
gnaw rope; rope won't hang butcher; butcher won't kill ox; ox won't
get home till midnight." But the rat wouldn't.
She went a little further, and she met a cat. So she said, "Cat! cat!
kill rat; rat won't gnaw rope; rope won't hang butcher; butcher won't
kill ox; ox won't drink water; water won't quench fire; fire won't burn
stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; pig won't get over the
stile; and I shan't get home till midnight." But the cat said to her,
"If you will go to yonder cow, and fetch me a saucer of milk, I will
kill the rat." So away went the old woman to the cow.
But the cow said to her, "If you will go to yonder haystack, and fetch
me a handful of hay, I'll give you the milk." So away went the old woman
to the haystack; and she brought the hay to the cow.
As soon as the cow had eaten the hay, she gave the old woman the milk;
and away she went with it in a saucer to the cat.
As soon as the cat had lapped up the milk, the cat began to kill the
rat; the rat began to gnaw the rope; the rope began to hang the butcher;
the butcher began to kill the ox; the ox began to drink the water; the
water began to quench the fire; the fire began to burn the stick; the
stick began to beat the dog; the dog began to bite the pig; the little
pig squealed and jumped over the stile; and so the old woman got home
before midnight.
THE WEE BANNOCK
Once upon a time there was an old man and his old wife who lived in a
wee cottage beside a wee burnie. They had two cows, five hens, and a
cock, a cat and two kittens. Now the old man looked after the cows, the
cock looked after the hens, the cat looked after a mouse in the
cupboard, and the two kittens looked after the old wife's spindle as it
twirled and tussled about on the hearthstone. But though the old wife
should have looked after the kittens, the more she said, "Sho! Sho! Go
away, kitty!" the more they looked after the spindle!
So, one day, when she was quite tired out with saying, "Sho! Sho!" the
old wife felt hungry and thought she could take a wee bite of something.
So she up and baked two wee oatmeal bannocks and set them to toast
before the fire. Now just as they were toasting away, smelling so fresh
and tasty, in came the old man, and seeing them look so crisp and nice,
takes up one of them and snaps a piece out of it. On this the other
bannock thought it high time to be off, so up it jumps and away it
trundles as fast as ever it could. And away ran the old wife after it
as fast as she could run, with her spindle in one hand and her distaff
in the other. But the wee bannock trundled faster than she could run, so
it was soon out of sight, and the old wife was obliged to go back and
tussle with the kittens again.
The wee bannock meanwhile trundled gaily down the hill till it came to a
big thatched house, and it ran boldly in at the door and sate itself
down by the fireside quite comfortably. Now there were three tailors in
the room working away on a big bench, and being tailors they were, of
course, dreadfully afraid, and jumped up to hide behind the goodwife who
was carding wool by the fire.
"Hout-tout!" she cried. "What are ye a-feared of? 'Tis naught but a wee
bit bannock. Just grip hold o' it, and I'll give ye a sup o' milk to
drink with it."
So up she gets with the carders in her hands, and the tailor had his
iron goose, and the apprentices, one with the big scissors and the other
with the ironing-board, and they all made for the wee bannock; but it
was too clever for them, and dodged about the fireside until the
apprentice, thinking to snap it with the big scissors, fell into the hot
ashes and got badly burnt. Then the tailor cast the goose at it, and the
other apprentice the ironing-board; but it wouldn't do. The wee bannock
got out at the doorway, where the goodwife flung the carders at it; but
it dodged them and trundled away gaily till it came to a small house by
the road-side. So in it ran bold as bold and sate itself down by the
hearth where the wife was winding a clue of yarn for her husband, the
weaver, who was click-clacking away at his loom.
"Tibby!" quoth the weaver. "Whatever's that?"
"Naught but a wee bannock," quoth she.
"Well, come and welcome," says he, "for the porridge was thin the morn;
so grip it, woman! grip it!"
"Aye," says she, and reaches out her hand to it. But the wee bannock
just dodged.
"Man!" says she, "yon's a clever wee bannockie! Catch it, man! Catch it
if you can."
But the wee bannock just dodged. "Cast the clue at it, woman!" shouted
the weaver.
But the wee bannock was out at the door, trundling away over the hill
like a new tarred sheep or a mad cow!
And it trundled away till it came to a cowherd's house where the
goodwife was churning her butter.
"Come in by," cried the goodwife when she saw the wee bannock all crisp
and fresh and tasty; "I've plenty cream to eat with you."
But at this the wee bannock began dodging about, and it dodged so
craftily that the goodwife overset the churn in trying to grip it, and
before she set it straight again the wee bannock was off, trundling away
down the hill till it came to a mill-house where the miller was sifting
meal. So in it ran and sate down by the trough.
"Ho, ho!" says the miller. "It's a sign o' plenty when the likes of you
run about the country-side with none to look after you. But come in by.
I like bannock and cheese for supper, so I'll give ye a night's
quarters." And with that he tapped his fat stomach.
At this the wee bannock turned and ran; it wasn't going to trust itself
with the miller and his cheese; and the miller, having nothing but the
meal to fling after it, just stood and stared; so the wee bannock
trundled quietly along the level till it came to the smithy where the
smith was welding horse-nails.
"Hullo!" says he, "you're a well-toasted bannock. You'll do fine with a
glass of ale! So come in by and I'll give you a lodging inside." And
with that he laughed, and tapped his fat stomach.
But the wee bannock thought the ale was as bad as the cheese, so it up
and away, with the smith after it. And when he couldn't come up with it,
he just cast his hammer at it. But the hammer missed and the wee bannock
was out of sight in a crack, and trundled and trundled till it came to a
farm-house where the goodman and his wife were beating out flax and
combing it. So it ran in to the fireside and began to toast itself
"Janet," says the goodman, "yon is a well-toasted wee bannock. I'll have
the half of it."
"And I'll take t'other half," says the goodwife, and reached out a hand
to grip it. But the wee bannock played dodgings again.
"My certy," says the wife, "but you're spirity!" And with that she cast
the flax comb at it. But it was too clever for her, so out it trundled
through the door and away was it down the road, till it came to another
house where the goodwife was stirring the scalding soup and the goodman
was plaiting a thorn collar for the calf. So it trundled in, and sate
down by the fire.
"Ho, Jock!" quoth the goodwife, "you're always crying on a well-toasted
bannock. Here's one! Come and eat it!"
Then the wee bannock tried dodgings again, and the goodwife cried on the
goodman to help her grip it.
"Aye, mother!" says he, "but where's it gone?"
"Over there!" cries she. "Quick! run to t'other side o' yon chair." And
the chair upset, and down came the goodman among the thorns. And the
goodwife she flung the soup spoon at it, and the scalding soup fell on
the goodman and scalded him, so the wee bannock ran out in a crack and
was away to the next house, where the folk were just sitting down to
their supper and the goodwife was scraping the pot.
"Look!" cries she, "here's a wee well-toasted bannock for him as catches
it!"
"Let's shut the door first," says the cautious goodman, "afore we try to
get a grip on it."
Now when the wee bannock heard this it judged it was time to be off; so
away it trundled and they after it helter-skelter. But though they threw
their spoons at it, and the goodman cast his best hat, the wee bannock
was too clever for them, and was out of sight in a crack.
Then away it trundled till it came to a house where the folk were just
away to their beds. The goodwife she was raking out the fire, and the
goodman had taken off his breeches.
"What's yon?" says he, for it was nigh dark.
"It will just be a wee bannock," says she.
"I could eat the half of it," says he.
"And I could eat t'other," quoth she.
Then they tried to grip it; but the wee bannock tried dodging. And the
goodman and the goodwife tumbled against each other in the dark and grew
"Cast your breeches at it, man!" cries the goodwife at last. "What's the
use of standing staring like a stuck pig?"
So the goodman cast his breeches at it and thought he had smothered it
sure enough; but somehow it wriggled out, and away it was, the goodman
after it without his breeches. You never saw such a race--a real clean
chase over the park, and through the whins, and round by the bramble
patch. But there the goodman lost sight of it and had to go back all
scratched and tired and shivering.
The wee bannock, however, trundled on till it was too dark even for a
wee bannock to see.
Then it came to a fox's hole in the side of a big whinbush and trundled
in to spend the night there; but the fox had had no meat for three whole
days, so he just said, "You're welcome, friend! I wish there were two of
you!"
And there were two! For he snapped the wee bannock into halves with one
bite. So that was an end of it!
[Illustration: Headpiece--How Jack went out to seek his Fortune]
HOW JACK WENT OUT TO SEEK HIS FORTUNE
Once on a time there was a boy named Jack, and one morning he started to
go and seek his fortune.
He hadn't gone very far before he met a cat.
"Where are you going, Jack?" said the cat.
"I am going to seek my fortune."
"May I go with you?"
"Yes," said Jack, "the more the merrier."
So on they went, Jack and the cat. Jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt,
jiggelty-jolt!
They went a little farther and they met a dog.
"Where are you going, Jack?" said the dog.
So on they went, Jack, the cat, and the dog! Jiggelty-jolt,
jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt!
They went a little farther and they met a goat.
"Where are you going, Jack?" said the goat.
So on they went, Jack, the cat, the dog, and the goat. Jiggelty-jolt,
They went a little farther and they met a bull.
"Where are you going, Jack?" said the bull.
So on they went, Jack, the cat, the dog, the goat, and the bull.
Jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt!
They went a little farther and they met a rooster.
"Where are you going, Jack?" said the rooster.
So on they went, Jack, the cat, the dog, the goat, the bull, and the
rooster. Jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt!
And they went on jiggelty-jolting till it was about dark, and it was
time to think of some place where they could spend the night. Now, after
a bit, they came in sight of a house, and Jack told his companions to
keep still while he went up and looked in through the window to see if
all was safe. And what did he see through the window but a band of
robbers seated at a table counting over great bags of gold!
"That gold shall be mine," quoth Jack to himself. "I have found my
fortune already."
Then he went back and told his companions to wait till he gave the word,
and then to make all the noise they possibly could in their own fashion.
So when they were all ready Jack gave the word, and the cat mewed, and
the dog barked, and the goat bleated, and the bull bellowed, and the
rooster crowed, and all together they made such a terrific hubbub that
the robbers jumped up in a fright and ran away, leaving their gold on
the table. So, after a good laugh, Jack and his companions went in and
took possession of the house and the gold.
Now Jack was a wise boy, and he knew that the robbers would come back in
the dead of the night to get their gold, and so when it came time to go
to bed he put the cat in the rocking-chair, and he put the dog under the
table, and he put the goat upstairs, and he put the bull in the cellar,
and bade the rooster fly up on to the roof.
Then he went to bed.
Now sure enough, in the dead of the night, the robbers sent one man back
to the house to look after their money. But before long he came back in
a great fright and told them a fearsome tale!
"I went back to the house," said he, "and went in and tried to sit down
in the rocking-chair, and there was an old woman knitting there, and
she--oh my!--stuck her knitting-needles into me."
(That was the cat, you know.)
"Then I went to the table to look after the money, but there was a
shoemaker under the table, and my! how he stuck his awl into me."
(That was the dog, you know.)
"So I started to go upstairs, but there was a man up there threshing,
and goody! how he knocked me down with his flail!"
(That was the goat, you know.)
"Then I started to go down to the cellar, but--oh dear me!--there was a
man down there chopping wood, and he knocked me up and he knocked me
down just terrible with his axe."
(That was the bull, you know.)
"But I shouldn't have minded all that if it hadn't been for an awful
little fellow on the top of the house by the kitchen chimney, who kept
a-hollering and hollering, 'Cook him in a stew! Cook him in a stew! Cook
him in a stew!'"
(And that, of course, was the cock-a-doodle-doo.)
Then the robbers agreed that they would rather lose their gold than meet
with such a fate; so they made off, and Jack next morning went gaily
home with his booty. And each of the animals carried a portion of it.
The cat hung a bag on its tail (a cat when it walks always carries its
tail stiff), the dog on his collar, the goat and the bull on their
horns, but Jack made the rooster carry a golden guinea in its beak to
prevent it from calling all the time:
  "Cock-a-doodle-doo,
   Cook him in a stew!"
THE BOGEY-BEAST
There was once a woman who was very, very cheerful, though she had
little to make her so; for she was old, and poor, and lonely. She lived
in a little bit of a cottage and earned a scant living by running
errands for her neighbours, getting a bite here, a sup there, as reward
for her services. So she made shift to get on, and always looked as spry
and cheery as if she had not a want in the world.
Now one summer evening, as she was trotting, full of smiles as ever,
along the high road to her hovel, what should she see but a big black
pot lying in the ditch!
"Goodness me!" she cried, "that would be just the very thing for me if I
only had something to put in it! But I haven't! Now who could have left
it in the ditch?"
And she looked about her expecting the owner would not be far off; but
she could see nobody.
"Maybe there is a hole in it," she went on, "and that's why it has been
cast away. But it would do fine to put a flower in for my window; so
I'll just take it home with me."
And with that she lifted the lid and looked inside. "Mercy me!" she
cried, fair amazed. "If it isn't full of gold pieces. Here's luck!"
And so it was, brimful of great gold coins. Well, at first she simply
stood stock-still, wondering if she was standing on her head or her
heels. Then she began saying:
"Lawks! But I do feel rich. I feel awful rich!"
After she had said this many times, she began to wonder how she was to
get her treasure home. It was too heavy for her to carry, and she could
see no better way than to tie the end of her shawl to it and drag it
behind her like a go-cart.
"It will soon be dark," she said to herself as she trotted along. "So
much the better! The neighbours will not see what I'm bringing home, and
I shall have all the night to myself, and be able to think what I'll do!
Mayhap I'll buy a grand house and just sit by the fire with a cup o' tea
and do no work at all like a queen. Or maybe I'll bury it at the garden
foot and just keep a bit in the old china teapot on the chimney-piece.
Or maybe--Goody! Goody! I feel that grand I don't know myself."
By this time she was a bit tired of dragging such a heavy weight, and,
stopping to rest a while, turned to look at her treasure.
And lo! it wasn't a pot of gold at all! It was nothing but a lump of
silver.
She stared at it, and rubbed her eyes, and stared at it again.
"Well! I never!" she said at last. "And me thinking it was a pot of
gold! I must have been dreaming. But this is luck! Silver is far less
trouble--easier to mind, and not so easy stolen. Them gold pieces would
have been the death o' me, and with this great lump of silver--"
So she went off again planning what she would do, and feeling as rich as
rich, until becoming a bit tired again she stopped to rest and gave a
look round to see if her treasure was safe; and she saw nothing but a
great lump of iron!
"Well! I never!" says she again. "And I mistaking it for silver! I must
have been dreaming. But this is luck! It's real convenient. I can get
penny pieces for old iron, and penny pieces are a deal handier for me
than your gold and silver. Why! I should never have slept a wink for
fear of being robbed. But a penny piece comes in useful, and I shall
sell that iron for a lot and be real rich--rolling rich."
So on she trotted full of plans as to how she would spend her penny
pieces, till once more she stopped to rest and looked round to see her
treasure was safe. And this time she saw nothing but a big stone.
"Well! I never!" she cried, full of smiles. "And to think I mistook it
for iron. I must have been dreaming. But here's luck indeed, and me
wanting a stone terrible bad to stick open the gate. Eh my! but it's a
change for the better! It's a fine thing to have good luck."
So, all in a hurry to see how the stone would keep the gate open, she
trotted off down the hill till she came to her own cottage. She
unlatched the gate and then turned to unfasten her shawl from the stone
which lay on the path behind her. Aye! It was a stone sure enough. There
was plenty light to see it lying there, douce and peaceable as a stone
should.
So she bent over it to unfasten the shawl end, when--"Oh my!" All of a
sudden it gave a jump, a squeal, and in one moment was as big as a
haystack. Then it let down four great lanky legs and threw out two long
ears, nourished a great long tail and romped off, kicking and squealing
and whinnying and laughing like a naughty, mischievous boy!
The old woman stared after it till it was fairly out of sight, then she
burst out laughing too.
"Well!" she chuckled, "I am in luck! Quite the luckiest body hereabouts.
Fancy my seeing the Bogey-Beast all to myself; and making myself so free
with it too! My goodness! I do feel that uplifted--that GRAND!"--
So she went into her cottage and spent the evening chuckling over her
good luck.
[Illustration: "Well!" she chuckled, "I am in luck!"]
LITTLE RED RIDING-HOOD
Once upon a time there was a little girl who was called little Red
Riding-Hood, because she was quite small and because she always wore a
red cloak with a big red hood to it, which her grandmother had made for
Now one day her mother, who had been churning and baking cakes, said to
her:
"My dear, put on your red cloak with the hood to it, and take this cake
and this pot of butter to your Grannie, and ask how she is, for I hear
she is ailing."
Now little Red Riding-Hood was very fond of her grandmother, who made
her so many nice things, so she put on her cloak joyfully and started on
her errand. But her grandmother lived some way off, and to reach the
cottage little Red Riding-Hood had to pass through a vast lonely forest.
However, some wood-cutters were at work in it, so little Red Riding-Hood
was not so very much alarmed when she saw a great big wolf coming
towards her, because she knew that wolves were cowardly things.
And sure enough the wolf, though but for the wood-cutters he would
surely have eaten little Red Riding-Hood, only stopped and asked her
politely where she was going.
"I am going to see Grannie, take her this cake and this pot of butter,
and ask how she is," says little Red Riding-Hood.
"Does she live a very long way off?" asks the wolf craftily.
"Not so very far if you go by the straight road," replied little Red
Riding-Hood. "You only have to pass the mill and the first cottage on
the right is Grannie's; but I am going by the wood path because there
are such a lot of nuts and flowers and butterflies."
"I wish you good luck," says the wolf politely. "Give my respects to
your grandmother and tell her I hope she is quite well."
And with that he trotted off. But instead of going his ways he turned
back, took the straight road to the old woman's cottage, and knocked at
the door.
Rap! Rap! Rap!
"Who's there?" asked the old woman, who was in bed.
"Little Red Riding-Hood," sings out the wolf, making his voice as shrill
as he could. "I've come to bring dear Grannie a pot of butter and a cake
from mother, and to ask how you are."
"Pull the bobbin, and the latch will go up," says the old woman, well
satisfied.
So the wolf pulled the bobbin, the latch went up, and--oh my!--it
wasn't a minute before he had gobbled up old Grannie, for he had had
nothing to eat for a week.
Then he shut the door, put on Grannie's nightcap, and, getting into bed,
rolled himself well up in the clothes.
By and by along comes little Red Riding-Hood, who had been amusing
herself by gathering nuts, running after butterflies, and picking
flowers.
So she knocked at the door.
"Who's there?" says the wolf, making his voice as soft as he could.
Now little Red Riding-Hood heard the voice was very gruff, but she
thought her grandmother had a cold; so she said:
"Little Red Riding-Hood, with a pot of butter and a cake from mother, to
ask how you are."
"Pull the bobbin, and the latch will go up."
So little Red Riding-Hood pulled the bobbin, the latch went up, and
there, she thought, was her grandmother in the bed; for the cottage was
so dark one could not see well. Besides, the crafty wolf turned his face
to the wall at first. And he made his voice as soft, as soft as he
could, when he said:
"Come and kiss me, my dear."
Then little Red Riding-Hood took off her cloak and went to the bed.
"Oh, Grandmamma, Grandmamma," says she, "what big arms you've got!"
"All the better to hug you with," says he.
"But, Grandmamma, Grandmamma, what big legs you have!"
"All the better to run with, my dear."
"Oh, Grandmamma, Grandmamma, what big ears you've got!"
"All the better to hear with, my dear."
"But, Grandmamma, Grandmamma, what big eyes you've got!"
"All the better to see you with, my dear!"
"Oh, Grandmamma, Grandmamma, what big teeth you've got!"
"All the better to eat you with, my dear!" says that wicked, wicked
wolf, and with that he gobbled up little Red Riding-Hood.
CHILDE ROWLAND
  Childe Rowland and his brothers twain
  Were playing at the ball.
  Their sister, Burd Helen, she played
  In the midst among them all.
For Burd Helen loved her brothers, and they loved her exceedingly. At
play she was ever their companion and they cared for her as brothers
should. And one day when they were at ball close to the churchyard--
  Childe Rowland kicked it with his foot
  And caught it on his knee.
  At last as he plunged among them all,
  O'er the church he made it flee.
Now Childe Rowland was Burd Helen's youngest, dearest brother, and there
was ever a loving rivalry between them as to which should win. So with a
laugh--
  Burd Helen round about the aisle
  To seek the ball is gone.
Now the ball had trundled to the right of the church; so, as Burd Helen
ran the nearest way to get it, she ran contrary to the sun's course,
and the light, shining full on her face, sent her shadow behind her.
Thus that happened which will happen at times when folk forget and run
widershins, that is against the light, so that their shadows are out of
sight and cannot be taken care of properly.
Now what happened you will learn by and by; meanwhile, Burd Helen's
three brothers waited for her return.
  But long they waited, and longer still,
  And she came not back again.
Then they grew alarmed, and--
  They sought her east, they sought her west,
  They sought her up and down.
  And woe were the hearts of her brethren,
  Since she was not to be found.
Not to be found anywhere--she had disappeared like dew on a May morning.
So at last her eldest brother went to Great Merlin the Magician, who
could tell and foretell, see and foresee all things under the sun and
beyond it, and asked him where Burd Helen could have gone.
"Fair Burd Helen," said the Magician, "must have been carried off with
her shadow by the fairies when she was running round the church
widershins; for fairies have power when folk go against the light. She
will now be in the Dark Tower of the King of Elfland, and none but the
boldest knight in Christendom will be able to bring her back."
"If it be possible to bring her back," said the eldest brother, "I will
do it, or perish in the attempt."
"Possible it is," quoth Merlin the Magician gravely. "But woe be to the
man or mother's son who attempts the task if he be not well taught
beforehand what he is to do."
Now the eldest brother of fair Burd Helen was brave indeed, danger did
not dismay him, so he begged the Magician to tell him exactly what he
should do, and what he should not do, as he was determined to go and
seek his sister. And the Great Magician told him, and schooled him, and
after he had learnt his lesson right well he girt on his sword, said
good-bye to his brothers and his mother, and set out for the Dark Tower
of Elfland to bring Burd Helen back.
  With doubt and muckle pain.
  But woe were the hearts of his brethren,
  For he came not back again.
So after a time Burd Helen's second brother went to Merlin the Magician
"School me also, for I go to find my brother and sister in the Dark
Tower of the King of Elfland and bring them back." For he also was brave
indeed, danger did not dismay him.
Then when he had been well schooled and had learnt his lesson, he said
good-bye to Childe Rowland, his brother, and to his mother the good
Queen, girt on his sword, and set out for the Dark Tower of Elfland to
bring back Burd Helen and her brother.
  With muckle doubt and pain.
  And woe were his mother's and brother's hearts,
Now when they had waited and waited a long, long time, and none had come
back from the Dark Tower of Elfland, Childe Rowland, the youngest, the
best beloved of Burd Helen's brothers, besought his mother to let him
also go on the quest; for he was the bravest of them all, and neither
death nor danger could dismay him. But at first his mother the Queen
"Not so! You are the last of my children; if you are lost, all is lost
indeed!"
But he begged so hard that at length the good Queen his mother bade him
God-speed, and girt about his waist his father's sword, the brand that
never struck in vain, and as she girt it on she chanted the spell that
gives victory.
So Childe Rowland bade her good-bye and went to the cave of the Great
Magician Merlin.
"Yet once more, Master," said the youth, "and but once more, tell how
man or mother's son may find fair Burd Helen and her brothers twain in
the Dark Tower of Elfland."
"My son," replied the wizard Merlin, "there be things twain; simple they
seem to say, but hard are they to perform. One thing is to do, and one
thing is not to do. Now the first thing you have to do is this: after
you have once entered the Land of Faery, whoever speaks to you, you
must out with your father's brand and cut off their head. In this you
must not fail. And the second thing you have not to do is this: after
you have entered the Land of Faery, bite no bit, sup no drop; for if in
Elfland you sup one drop or bite one bit, never again will you see
Middle Earth."
Then Childe Rowland said these two lessons over and over until he knew
them by heart; so, well schooled, he thanked the Great Master and went
on his way to seek the Dark Tower of Elfland.
And he journeyed far, and he journeyed fast, until at last on a wide
moorland he came upon a horse-herd feeding his horses; and the horses
were wild, and their eyes were like coals of fire.
Then he knew they must be the horses of the King of Elfland, and that at
last he must be in the Land of Faery.
So Childe Rowland said to the horse-herd, "Canst tell me where lies the
Dark Tower of the Elfland King?"
And the horse-herd answered, "Nay, that is beyond my ken; but go a
little farther and thou wilt come to a cow-herd who mayhap can tell
thee."
Then at once Childe Rowland drew his father's sword that never struck in
vain, and smote off the horse-herd's head, so that it rolled on the wide
moorland and frightened the King of Elfland's horses. And he journeyed
further till he came to a wide pasture where a cow-herd was herding
cows. And the cows looked at him with fiery eyes, so he knew that they
must be the King of Elfland's cows, and that he was still in the Land of
Faery. Then he said to the cow-herd:
"Canst tell me where lies the Dark Tower of the Elfland King?"
And the cow-herd answered, "Nay, that is beyond my ken; but go a little
farther and thou wilt come to a hen-wife who, mayhap, can tell thee."
So at once Childe Rowland, remembering his lesson, out with his father's
good sword that never struck in vain, and off went the cow-herd's head
spinning amongst the grasses and frightening the King of Elfland's cows.
Then he journeyed further till he came to an orchard where an old woman
in a grey cloak was feeding fowls.
And the fowls' little eyes were like little coals of fire, so he knew
that they were the King of Elfland's fowls, and that he was still in the
Land of Faery.
And he said to the hen-wife, "Canst tell me where lies the Dark Tower of
the King of Elfland?"
Now the hen-wife looked at him and smiled. "Surely I can tell you," said
she. "Go on a little farther. There you will find a low green hill;
green and low against the sky. And the hill will have three
terrace-rings upon it from bottom to top. Go round the first terrace
  'Open from within;
   Let me in! Let me in!'
"Then go round the second terrace and say:
  'Open wide, open wide;
   Let me inside.'
"Then go round the third terrace and say:
  'Open fast, open fast;
   Let me in at last.'
"Then a door will open and let you in to the Dark Tower of the King of
Elfland. Only remember to go round widershins. If you go round with the
sun the door will not open. So good luck to you!"
Now the hen-wife spoke so fair, and smiled so frank, that Childe Rowland
forgot for a moment what he had to do. Therefore he thanked the old
woman for her courtesy and was just going on, when, all of a sudden, he
remembered his lesson. And he out with his father's sword that never yet
struck in vain, and smote off the hen-wife's head, so that it rolled
among the corn and frightened the fiery-eyed fowls of the King of
Elfland.
After that he went on and on, till, against the blue sky, he saw a round
green hill set with three terraces from top to bottom.
Then he did as the hen-wife had told him, not forgetting to go round
widershins, so that the sun was always on his face.
Now when he had gone round the third terrace saying:
  "Open fast, open fast;
   Let me in at last,"
what should happen but that he should see a door in the hill-side. And
it opened and let him in. Then it closed behind him with a click, and
Childe Rowland was left in the dark; for he had gotten at last to the
Dark Tower of the King of Elfland.
It was very dark at first, perhaps because the sun had part blinded his
eyes; for after a while it became twilight, though where the light came
from none could tell, unless through the walls and the roof; for there
were neither windows nor candles. But in the gloaming light he could see
a long passage of rough arches made of rock that was transparent and all
encrusted with sheep-silver, rock-spar, and many bright stones. And the
air was warm as it ever is in Elfland. So he went on and on in the
twilight that came from nowhere, till he found himself before two wide
doors all barred with iron. But they flew open at his touch, and he saw
a wonderful, large, and spacious hall that seemed to him to be as long
and as broad as the green hill itself. The roof was supported by pillars
wide and lofty beyond the pillars of a cathedral; and they were of gold
and silver, fretted into foliage, and between and around them were woven
wreaths of flowers. And the flowers were of diamonds, and rubies, and
topaz, and the leaves of emerald. And the arches met in the middle of
the roof where hung, by a golden chain, an immense lamp made of a
hollowed pearl, white and translucent. And in the middle of this lamp
was a mighty carbuncle, blood-red, that kept spinning round and round,
shedding its light to the very ends of the huge hall, which thus seemed
to be filled with the shining of the setting sun.
Now at one end of the hall was a marvelous, wondrous, glorious couch of
velvet, silk and gold, and on it sate fair Burd Helen combing her
beautiful golden hair with a golden comb. But her face was all set and
wan, as if it were made of stone. When she saw Childe Rowland she never
moved, and her voice came like the voice of the dead as she said:
  "God pity you, poor luckless fool!
   What have you here to do?"
Now at first Childe Rowland felt he must clasp this semblance of his
dear sister in his arms, but he remembered the lesson which the Great
Magician Merlin had taught him, and drawing his father's brand which had
never yet been drawn in vain, and turning his eyes from the horrid
sight, he struck with all his force at the enchanted form of fair Burd
Helen.
And lo, when he turned to look in fear and trembling, there she was her
own self, her joy fighting with her fears. And she clasped him in her
arms and cried:
  "Oh, hear you this, my youngest brother,
   Why didn't you bide at home?
   Had you a hundred thousand lives,
   Ye couldn't spare ne'er a one!
  "But sit you down, my dearest dear,
   Oh! woe that ye were born,
   For, come the King of Elfland in,
   Your fortune is forlorn."
So with tears and smiles she seated him beside her on the wondrous
couch, and they told each other what they each had suffered and done. He
told her how he had come to Elfland. She told him how she had been
carried off, shadow and all, because she ran round a church widershins,
and how her brothers had been enchanted, and lay intombed as if dead, as
she had been. Because they had not had the courage to obey the Great
Magician's lesson to the letter, and cut off her head.
Now after a time Childe Rowland, who had travelled far and travelled
fast, became very hungry, and forgetting all about the second lesson of
the Magician Merlin, asked his sister for some food; and she, being
still under the spell of Elfland, could not warn him of his danger. She
could only look at him sadly as she rose up and brought him a golden
basin full of bread and milk.
Now in those days it was manners before taking food from anyone to say
thank you with your eyes, and so just as Childe Rowland was about to put
the golden bowl to his lips, he raised his eyes to his sister's.
And in an instant he remembered what the Great Magician had said: "Bite
no bit, sup no drop, for if in Elfland you sup one drop or bite one bit,
never again will you see Middle Earth."
So he dashed the bowl to the ground, and standing square and fair, lithe
and young and strong, he cried like a challenge:
"Not a sup will I swallow, not a bit will I bite, till fair Burd Helen
is set free."
Then immediately there was a loud noise like thunder, and a voice was
heard saying:
  "Fee, fi, fo, fum,
   I smell the blood of a Christian Man.
   Be he alive or dead, my brand
   Shall dash his brains from his brain-pan."
Then the folding-doors of the vast hall burst open and the King of
Elfland entered like a storm of wind. What he was really like Childe
Rowland had not time to see, for with a bold cry:
"Strike, Bogle! thy hardest if thou darest!" he rushed to meet the foe,
his good sword, that never yet did fail, in his hand.
And Childe Rowland and the King of Elfland fought, and fought, and
fought, while Burd Helen, with her hands clasped, watched them in fear
and hope.
So they fought, and fought, and fought, until at last Childe Rowland
beat the King of Elfland to his knees. Whereupon he cried, "I yield me.
Thou hast beaten me in fair fight."
Then Childe Rowland said, "I grant thee mercy if thou wilt release my
sister and my brothers from all spells and enchantments, and let us go
back to Middle Earth."
So that was agreed; and the Elfin King went to a golden chest whence he
took a phial that was filled with a blood-red liquor. And with this
liquor he anointed the ears and the eyelids, the nostrils, the lips, and
the finger-tips of the bodies of Burd Helen's two brothers that lay as
dead in two golden coffers.
And immediately they sprang to life and declared that their souls only
had been away, but had now returned.
After this the Elfin King said a charm which took away the very last bit
of enchantment, and adown the huge hall that showed as if it were lit by
the setting sun, and through the long passage of rough arches made of
rock that was transparent and all encrusted with sheep-silver,
rock-spar, and many bright stones, where twilight reigned, the three
brothers and their sister passed. Then the door opened in the green
hill, it clicked behind them, and they left the Dark Tower of the King
of Elfland never to return.
For, no sooner were they in the light of day, than they found themselves
at home.
But fair Burd Helen took care never to go widershins round a church
[Illustration: They both met together upon Nottingham bridge]
THE WISE MEN OF GOTHAM
OF BUYING OF SHEEP
"Buy sheep?" said the other; "and which way will you bring them home?"
Then they beat their staves against the ground, one against the other,
as if there had been a hundred sheep between them.
Then the other said, "If that thou make much to do, I will put my
[Illustration: "A vengeance on her!" said they. "We did not make our
hedge high enough"]
OF HEDGING A CUCKOO
[Illustration: He took out the cheeses and rolled them down the hill]
OF SENDING CHEESES
after another after you." Then he laid down his wallet and took out the
cheeses and rolled them down the hill. Some went into one bush, and some
went into another.
"I charge you all to meet me near the market-place," cried he; and when
the fellow came to the market to meet his cheeses, he stayed there till
the market was nearly done. Then he went about to inquire of his friends
and neighbours, and other men, if they did see his cheeses come to the
to ride to York, to seek his cheeses where they were not; but to this
[Illustration: And they left the eel to drown]
OF DROWNING EELS
other salt fish. One consulted with the other, and agreed that such
fish should be cast into their pond (which was in the middle of the
town), that they might breed against the next year, and every man that
had salt fish left cast them into the pool.
"What shall we do to him?" said one to the other.
"Chop him into pieces," said another.
"Not so," said another; "let us drown him."
have from us"; and they left the eel to drown.
[Illustration: The hare ran on along the country way]
OF SENDING RENT
were written and the money put in a purse, they tied it round the hare's
neck, saying, "First you go to Lancaster, then thou must go to
Loughborough, and Newarke is our landlord, and commend us to him, and
Another said, "It is a subtle hare; let her alone; she will not keep the
[Illustration: A courtier came riding by, and he did ask what they were
seeking]
OF COUNTING
"Marry," said one, "let us see about that. Twelve of us came out." And
that was drowned, and made great lamentation. A courtier came riding by,
and he did ask what they were seeking, and why they were so sorrowful.
"Oh," said they, "this day we came to fish in this brook, and there were
twelve of us, and one is drowned."
"Why," said the courtier, "count me how many of you there be"; and one
CAPORUSHES
Once upon a time, a long, long while ago, when all the world was young
and all sorts of strange things happened, there lived a very rich
gentleman whose wife had died leaving him three lovely daughters. They
were as the apple of his eye, and he loved them exceedingly.
Now one day he wanted to find out if they loved him in return, so he
said to the eldest, "How much do you love me, my dear?"
And she answered as pat as may be, "As I love my life."
"Very good, my dear," said he, and gave her a kiss. Then he said to the
second girl, "How much do you love me, my dear?"
And she answered as swift as thought, "Better than all the world
beside."
"Good!" he replied, and patted her on the cheek. Then he turned to the
youngest, who was also the prettiest.
"And how much do you love me, my dearest?"
Now the youngest daughter was not only pretty, she was clever. So she
thought a moment, then she said slowly:
"I love you as fresh meat loves salt!"
Now when her father heard this he was very angry, because he really
loved her more than the others.
"What!" he said. "If that is all you give me in return for all I've
given you, out of my house you go." So there and then he turned her out
of the home where she had been born and bred, and shut the door in her
Not knowing where to go, she wandered on, and she wandered on, till she
came to a big fen where the reeds grew ever so tall and the rushes
swayed in the wind like a field of corn. There she sate down and plaited
herself an overall of rushes and a cap to match, so as to hide her fine
clothes, and her beautiful golden hair that was all set with milk-white
pearls. For she was a wise girl, and thought that in such lonely
country, mayhap, some robber might fall in with her and kill her to get
her fine clothes and jewels.
It took a long time to plait the dress and cap, and while she plaited
she sang a little song:
  "Hide my hair, O cap o' rushes,
   Hide my heart, O robe o' rushes.
   Sure! my answer had no fault,
   I love him more than he loves salt."
And the fen birds sate and listened and sang back to her:
  "Cap o' rushes, shed no tear,
   Robe o' rushes, have no fear;
   With these words if fault he'd find,
   Sure your father must be blind."
When her task was finished she put on her robe of rushes and it hid all
her fine clothes, and she put on the cap and it hid all her beautiful
hair, so that she looked quite a common country girl. But the fen birds
flew away, singing as they flew:
  "Cap-o-rushes! we can see,
   Robe o' rushes! what you be,
   Fair and clean, and fine and tidy,
   So you'll be whate'er betide ye."
By this time she was very, very hungry, so she wandered on, and she
wandered on; but ne'er a cottage or a hamlet did she see, till just at
sun-setting she came on a great house on the edge of the fen. It had a
fine front door to it; but mindful of her dress of rushes she went round
to the back. And there she saw a strapping fat scullion washing pots and
pans with a very sulky face. So, being a clever girl, she guessed what
the maid was wanting, and said:
"If I may have a night's lodging, I will scrub the pots and pans for
"Why! Here's luck," replied the scullery-maid, ever so pleased. "I was
just wanting badly to go a-walking with my sweetheart. So if you will do
my work you shall share my bed and have a bite of my supper. Only mind
you scrub the pots clean or cook will be at me."
Now next morning the pots were scraped so clean that they looked like
new, and the saucepans were polished like silver, and the cook said to
the scullion, "Who cleaned these pots? Not you, I'll swear." So the maid
had to up and out with the truth. Then the cook would have turned away
the old maid and put on the new, but the latter would not hear of it.
"The maid was kind to me and gave me a night's lodging," she said. "So
now I will stay without wage and do the dirty work for her."
So Caporushes--for so they called her since she would give no other
name--stayed on and cleaned the pots and scraped the saucepans.
Now it so happened that her master's son came of age, and to celebrate
the occasion a ball was given to the neighbourhood, for the young man
was a grand dancer, and loved nothing so well as a country measure. It
was a very fine party, and after supper was served, the servants were
allowed to go and watch the quality from the gallery of the ball-room.
But Caporushes refused to go, for she also was a grand dancer, and she
was afraid that when she heard the fiddles starting a merry jig, she
might start dancing. So she excused herself by saying she was too tired
with scraping pots and washing saucepans; and when the others went off,
she crept up to her bed.
But alas! and alack-a-day! The door had been left open, and as she lay
in her bed she could hear the fiddlers fiddling away and the tramp of
dancing feet.
Then she upped and off with her cap and robe of rushes, and there she
was ever so fine and tidy. She was in the ball-room in a trice joining
in the jig, and none was more beautiful or better dressed than she.
While as for her dancing...!
Her master's son singled her out at once, and with the finest of bows
engaged her as his partner for the rest of the night. So she danced away
to her heart's content, while the whole room was agog, trying to find
out who the beautiful young stranger could be. But she kept her own
counsel and, making some excuse, slipped away before the ball finished;
so when her fellow-servants came to bed, there she was in hers in her
cap and robe of rushes, pretending to be fast asleep.
Next morning, however, the maids could talk of nothing but the beautiful
stranger.
"You should ha' seen her," they said. "She was the loveliest young lady
as ever you see, not a bit like the likes o' we. Her golden hair was all
silvered wi' pearls, and her dress--law! You wouldn't believe how she
was dressed. Young master never took his eyes off her."
And Caporushes only smiled and said, with a twinkle in her eye, "I
should like to see her, but I don't think I ever shall."
"Oh yes, you will," they replied, "for young master has ordered another
ball to-night in hopes she will come to dance again."
But that evening Caporushes refused once more to go to the gallery,
saying she was too tired with cleaning pots and scraping saucepans. And
once more when she heard the fiddlers fiddling she said to herself, "I
must have one dance--just one with the young master: he dances so
beautifully." For she felt certain he would dance with her.
And sure enough, when she had upped and offed with her cap and robe of
rushes, there he was at the door waiting for her to come; for he had
determined to dance with no one else.
So he took her by the hand, and they danced down the ball-room. It was a
sight of all sights! Never were such dancers! So young, so handsome, so
fine, so gay!
But once again Caporushes kept her own counsel and just slipped away on
some excuse in time, so that when her fellow-servants came to their beds
they found her in hers, pretending to be fast asleep; but her cheeks
were all flushed and her breath came fast. So they said, "She is
dreaming. We hope her dreams are happy."
But next morning they were full of what she had missed. Never was such a
beautiful young gentleman as young master! Never was such a beautiful
young lady! Never was such beautiful dancing! Every one else had stopped
theirs to look on.
And Caporushes, with a twinkle in her eyes, said, "I should like to see
her; but I'm sure I never shall!"
"Oh yes!" they replied. "If you come to-night you're sure to see her;
for young master has ordered another ball in hopes the beautiful
stranger will come again; for it's easy to see he is madly in love with
Then Caporushes told herself she would not dance again, since it was not
fit for a gay young master to be in love with his scullery-maid; but,
alas! the moment she heard the fiddlers fiddling, she just upped and
offed with her rushes, and there she was fine and tidy as ever! She
didn't even have to brush her beautiful golden hair! And once again she
was in the ball-room in a trice, dancing away with young master, who
never took his eyes off her, and implored her to tell him who she was.
But she kept her own counsel and only told him that she never, never,
never would come to dance any more, and that he must say good-bye. And
he held her hand so fast that she had a job to get away, and lo and
behold! his ring came off his finger, and as she ran up to her bed there
it was in her hand! She had just time to put on her cap and robe of
rushes, when her fellow-servants came trooping in and found her awake.
"It was the noise you made coming upstairs," she made excuse; but they
said, "Not we! It is the whole place that is in an uproar searching for
the beautiful stranger. Young master he tried to detain her; but she
slipped from him like an eel. But he declares he will find her; for if
he doesn't he will die of love for her."
Then Caporushes laughed. "Young men don't die of love," says she. "He
will find some one else."
But he didn't. He spent his whole time looking for his beautiful dancer,
but go where he might, and ask whom he would, he never heard anything
about her. And day by day he grew thinner and thinner, and paler and
paler, until at last he took to his bed.
And the housekeeper came to the cook and said, "Cook the nicest dinner
you can cook, for young master eats nothing."
Then the cook prepared soups, and jellies, and creams, and roast
chicken, and bread sauce; but the young man would none of them.
And Caporushes cleaned the pots and scraped the saucepans and said
nothing.
Then the housekeeper came crying and said to the cook, "Prepare some
gruel for young master. Mayhap he'd take that. If not he will die for
love of the beautiful dancer. If she could see him now she would have
pity on him."
So the cook began to make the gruel, and Caporushes left scraping
saucepans and watched her.
"Let me stir it," she said, "while you fetch a cup from the
pantry-room."
So Caporushes stirred the gruel, and what did she do but slips young
master's ring into it before the cook came back!
Then the butler took the cup upstairs on a silver salver. But when the
young master saw it he waved it away, till the butler with tears begged
him just to taste it.
So the young master took a silver spoon and stirred the gruel; and he
felt something hard at the bottom of the cup. And when he fished it up,
lo! it was his own ring! Then he sate up in bed and said quite loud,
"Send for the cook!" And when she came he asked her who made the gruel.
"I did," she said, for she was half-pleased and half-frightened.
Then he looked at her all over and said, "No, you didn't! You're too
stout! Tell me who made it and you shan't be harmed!"
Then the cook began to cry. "If you please, sir, I did make it; but
Caporushes stirred it."
"And who is Caporushes?" asked the young man.
"If you please, sir, Caporushes is the scullion," whimpered the cook.
Then the young man sighed and fell back on his pillow. "Send Caporushes
here," he said in a faint voice; for he really was very near dying.
And when Caporushes came he just looked at her cap and her robe of
rushes and turned his face to the wall; but he asked her in a weak
little voice, "From whom did you get that ring?"
Now when Caporushes saw the poor young man so weak and worn with love
for her, her heart melted, and she replied softly:
"From him that gave it me," quoth she, and offed with her cap and robe
of rushes, and there she was as fine and tidy as ever with her beautiful
golden hair all silvered over with pearls.
And the young man caught sight of her with the tail of his eye, and sate
up in bed as strong as may be, and drew her to him and gave her a great
big kiss.
So, of course, they were to be married in spite of her being only a
scullery-maid, for she told no one who she was. Now every one far and
near was asked to the wedding. Amongst the invited guests was
Caporushes' father, who, from grief at losing his favourite daughter,
had lost his sight, and was very dull and miserable. However, as a
friend of the family, he had to come to the young master's wedding.
Now the marriage feast was to be the finest ever seen; but Caporushes
went to her friend the cook and said:
"Dress every dish without one mite of salt."
"That'll be rare and nasty," replied the cook; but because she prided
herself on having let Caporushes stir the gruel and so saved the young
master's life, she did as she was asked, and dressed every dish for the
wedding breakfast without one mite of salt.
Now when the company sate down to table their faces were full of smiles
and content, for all the dishes looked so nice and tasty; but no sooner
had the guests begun to eat than their faces fell; for nothing can be
tasty without salt.
Then Caporushes' blind father, whom his daughter had seated next to her,
burst out crying.
"What is the matter?" she asked.
Then the old man sobbed, "I had a daughter whom I loved dearly, dearly.
And I asked her how much she loved me, and she replied, 'As fresh meat
loves salt.' And I was angry with her and turned her out of house and
home, for I thought she didn't love me at all. But now I see she loved
me best of all."
And as he said the words his eyes were opened, and there beside him was
his daughter lovelier than ever.
And she gave him one hand, and her husband, the young master, the other,
and laughed saying, "I love you both as fresh meat loves salt." And
after that they were all happy for evermore.
[Illustration: She sate down and plaited herself an overall of rushes
and a cap to match]
    THE BABES IN THE WOOD
    Now ponder well, you parents dear,
      These words which I shall write;
    A doleful story you shall hear,
      In time brought forth to light.
    A gentleman of good account
      In Norfolk dwelt of late,
    Who did in honour far surmount
      Most men of his estate.
    Sore sick he was and like to die,
      No help his life could save;
    His wife by him as sick did lie,
      And both possest one grave.
    No love between these two was lost,
      Each was to other kind;
    In love they lived, in love they died,
      And left two babes behind:
    The one a fine and pretty boy
      Not passing three years old,
    The other a girl more young than he,
      And framed in beauty's mould.
    The father left his little son,
      As plainly did appear,
    When he to perfect age should come,
      Three hundred pounds a year;
    And to his little daughter Jane
      Five hundred pounds in gold,
    To be paid down on marriage-day,
      Which might not be controlled.
    But if the children chanced to die
      Ere they to age should come,
    Their uncle should possess their wealth;
      For so the will did run.
    "Now, brother," said the dying man,
      "Look to my children dear;
    Be good unto my boy and girl,
      No friends else have they here;
    To God and you I recommend
      My children dear this day;
    But little while be sure we have
      Within this world to stay.
    "You must be father and mother both,
      And uncle, all in one;
    God knows what will become of them
      When I am dead and gone."
    With that bespake their mother dear:
      "O brother kind," quoth she,
    "You are the man must bring our babes
      To wealth or misery.
    "And if you keep them carefully,
      Then God will you reward;
    But if you otherwise should deal,
      God will your deeds regard."
    With lips as cold as any stone,
      They kissed their children small:
    "God bless you both, my children dear!"
      With that the tears did fall.
    These speeches then their brother spake
      To this sick couple there:
    "The keeping of your little ones,
      Sweet sister, do not fear;
    God never prosper me nor mine,
      Nor aught else that I have,
    If I do wrong your children dear
      When you are laid in grave!"
    The parents being dead and gone,
      The children home he takes,
    And brings them straight unto his house,
      Where much of them he makes.
    He had not kept these pretty babes
      A twelvemonth and a day,
    But, for their wealth, he did devise
      To make them both away.
    He bargained with two ruffians strong,
      Which were of furious mood,
    That they should take these children young.
      And slay them in a wood.
    He told his wife an artful tale
      He would the children send
    To be brought up in London town
      With one that was his friend.
    Away then went those pretty babes,
      Rejoicing at that tide,
    Rejoicing with a merry mind
      They should on cock-horse ride.
    They prate and prattle pleasantly,
      As they ride on the way,
    To those that should their butchers be
      And work their lives' decay:
    So that the pretty speech they had
      Made Murder's heart relent;
    And they that undertook the deed
      Full sore now did repent.
    Yet one of them, more hard of heart,
      Did vow to do his charge,
    Because the wretch that hired him
      Had paid him very large.
    The other won't agree thereto,
      So there they fall to strife;
    With one another they did fight
      About the children's life;
    And he that was of mildest mood
      Did slay the other there,
    Within an unfrequented wood;
      The babes did quake for fear!
    He took the children by the hand,
      Tears standing in their eye,
    And bade them straightway follow him,
      And look they did not cry;
    And two long miles he led them on,
      While they for food complain:
    "Stay here," quoth he, "I'll bring you bread,
      When I come back again."
    These pretty babes, with hand in hand,
      Went wandering up and down;
    But never more could see the man
      Approaching from the town.
    Their pretty lips with blackberries
      Were all besmeared and dyed;
    And when they saw the darksome night,
      They sat them down and cried.
    Thus wandered these poor innocents,
      Till death did end their grief;
    In one another's arms they died,
      As wanting due relief:
    No burial this pretty pair
      From any man receives,
    Till Robin Redbreast piously
      Did cover them with leaves.
    And now the heavy wrath of God
      Upon their uncle fell;
    Yea, fearful fiends did haunt his house,
      His conscience felt an hell:
    His barns were fired, his goods consumed,
      His lands were barren made,
    His cattle died within the field,
      And nothing with him stayed.
    And in a voyage to Portugal
      Two of his sons did die;
    And to conclude, himself was brought
      To want and misery:
    He pawned and mortgaged all his land
      Ere seven years came about.
    And now at last this wicked act
      Did by this means come out.
    The fellow that did take in hand
      These children for to kill,
    Was for a robbery judged to die,
      Such was God's blessed will:
    Who did confess the very truth,
      As here hath been displayed:
    The uncle having died in jail,
      Where he for debt was laid.
    You that executors be made,
      And overseers eke,
    Of children that be fatherless,
      And infants mild and meek,
    Take you example by this thing,
      And yield to each his right,
    Lest God with suchlike misery
      Your wicked minds requite.
THE RED ETTIN
There was once a widow that lived on a small bit of ground, which she
rented from a farmer. And she had two sons; and by and by it was time
for the wife to send them away to seek their fortune. So she told her
eldest son one day to take a can and bring her water from the well, that
she might bake a cake for him; and however much or however little water
he might bring, the cake would be great or small accordingly, and that
cake was to be all that she could give him when he went on his travels.
The lad went away with the can to the well, and filled it with water,
and then came away home again; but the can being broken, the most part
of the water had run out before he got back. So his cake was very small;
yet small as it was, his mother asked him if he was willing to take the
half of it with her blessing, telling him that, if he chose rather to
take the whole, he would only get it with her curse. The young man,
thinking he might have to travel a far way, and not knowing when or how
he might get other provisions, said he would like to have the whole
cake, come of his mother's malison what might; so she gave him the
whole cake, and her malison along with it. Then he took his brother
aside, and gave him a knife to keep till he should come back, desiring
him to look at it every morning, and as long as it continued to be
clear, then he might be sure that the owner of it was well; but if it
grew dim and rusty, then for certain some ill had befallen him.
So the young man went to seek his fortune. And he went all that day, and
all the next day; and on the third day, in the afternoon, he came up to
where a shepherd was sitting with a flock of sheep. And he went up to
the shepherd and asked him to whom the sheep belonged; and he answered:
    "To the Red Ettin of Ireland
     Who lives in Ballygan,
   He stole King Malcolm's daughter,
     The king of fair Scotland.
   He beats her, he binds her,
     He lays her on a hand;
   And every day he strikes her
     With a bright silver wand.
   'Tis said there's one predestinate
     To be his mortal foe;
   But sure that man is yet unborn,
     And long may it be so!"
After this the shepherd told him to beware of the beasts he should next
meet, for they were of a very different kind from any he had yet seen.
So the young man went on, and by and by he saw a multitude of very
dreadful, terrible, horrible beasts, with two heads, and on every head
four horns! And he was sore frightened, and ran away from them as fast
as he could; and glad was he when he came to a castle that stood on a
hillock, with the door standing wide open to the wall. And he went in to
the castle for shelter, and there he saw an old wife sitting beside the
kitchen fire. He asked the wife if he might stay for the night, as he
was tired with a long journey; and the wife said he might, but it was
not a good place for him to be in, as it belonged to the Red Ettin, who
was a very terrible monster with three heads, who spared no living man
it could get hold of. The young man would have gone away, but he was
afraid of the two-headed four-horned beasts outside; so he beseeched the
old woman to hide him as best she could, and not tell the Ettin he was
there. He thought, if he could put over the night, he might get away in
the morning, without meeting with the dreadful, terrible, horrible
beasts, and so escape.
But he had not been long in his hiding-hole, before the awful Ettin came
in; and no sooner was he in, than he was heard crying:
  "Snouk but! and snouk ben!
   I find the smell of an earthly man;
   Be he living, or be he dead,
   His heart this night shall kitchen my bread."
Well, the monster began to search about, and he soon found the poor
young man, and pulled him from his hiding-place. And when he had got him
out, he told him that if he could answer him three questions his life
should be spared.
So the first head asked: "A thing without an end; what's that?"
But the young man knew not.
Then the second head said: "The smaller the more dangerous; what's
that?"
And then the third head asked: "The dead carrying the living? riddle me
So the lad not being able to answer one of these questions, the Red
Ettin took a mallet from behind the door, knocked him on the head, and
turned him into a pillar of stone.
Now on the morning after this happened the younger brother took out the
knife to look at it, and he was grieved to find it all brown with rust.
So he told his mother that the time was now come for him to go away upon
his travels also. At first she refused to let him go; but at last she
requested him to take the can to the well for water, that she might make
a cake for him. So he went, but as he was bringing home the water, a
raven over his head cried to him to look, and he would see that the
water was running out. Now being a young man of sense, and seeing the
water running out, he took some clay and patched up the holes, so that
he brought home enough water to bake a large cake. And when his mother
put it to him to take the half cake with her blessing, he took it
instead of having the whole with her malison.
So he went away on his journey with his mother's blessing. Now after he
had travelled a far way, he met with an old woman who asked him if he
would give her a bit of his cake. And he said, "I will gladly do that";
so he gave her a piece of the cake. Then the old woman, who was a fairy,
gave him a magic wand, that might yet be of service to him, if he took
care to use it rightly; and she told him a great deal that would happen
to him, and what he ought to do in all circumstances; and after that,
she vanished in an instant, out of his sight. Then he went on his way
until he came up to the old man who was herding the sheep; and when he
asked him to whom the sheep belonged, the answer was:
  "To the Red Ettin of Ireland
     He lays her on a band;
   But now I fear his end is near,
     And death is close at hand;
   For you're to be, I plainly see,
     The heir of all his land."
So the younger brother went on his way; but when he came to the place
where the dreadful, terrible, horrible beasts were standing, he did not
stop nor run away, but went boldly through amongst them. One came up
roaring with open mouth to devour him, when he struck it with his wand,
and laid it in an instant dead at his feet. He soon came to the Ettin's
castle, where he found the door shut, but he knocked boldly, and was
admitted. Then the old woman who sat by the fire warned him of the
terrible Ettin, and what had been the fate of his brother; but he was
not to be daunted, and would not even hide.
Then by and by the monster came in, crying as before:
Well, he quickly espied the young man, and bade him stand forth on the
floor, and told him that if he could answer three questions his life
would be spared.
So the first head asked: "What's the thing without an end?"
Now the younger brother had been told by the fairy to whom he had given
a piece of his cake what he ought to say; so he answered:
"A bowl."
Then the first head frowned, but the second head asked:
"The smaller the more dangerous; what's that?"
"A bridge," says the younger brother, quite fast.
Then the first and the second heads frowned, but the third head asked:
"When does the dead carry the living? riddle me that."
At this the young man answered up at once and said:
"When a ship sails on the sea with men inside her."
When the Red Ettin found all his riddles answered, he knew that his
power was gone, so he tried to escape, but the young man took up an axe
and hewed off the monster's three heads. Then he asked the old woman to
show him where the king's daughter lay; and the old woman took him
upstairs, and opened a great many doors, and out of every door came a
beautiful lady who had been imprisoned there by the Red Ettin; and last
of all the ladies was the king's daughter. Then the old woman took him
down into a low room, and there stood a stone pillar; but he had only to
touch it with his wand, and his brother started into life.
So the whole of the prisoners were overjoyed at their deliverance, for
which they thanked the younger brother again and again. Next day they
all set out for the king's court, and a gallant company they made. Then
the king married his daughter to the young man who had delivered her,
and gave a noble's daughter to his brother.
So they all lived happily all the rest of their days.
THE FISH AND THE RING
Once upon a time there lived a Baron who was a great magician, and could
tell by his arts and charms everything that was going to happen at any
Now this great lord had a little son born to him as heir to all his
castles and lands. So, when the little lad was about four years old,
wishing to know what his fortune would be, the Baron looked in his Book
of Fate to see what it foretold.
And, lo and behold! it was written that this much-loved, much-prized
heir to all the great lands and castles was to marry a low-born maiden.
So the Baron was dismayed, and set to work by more arts and charms to
discover if this maiden were already born, and if so, where she lived.
And he found out that she had just been born in a very poor house, where
the poor parents were already burdened with five children.
So he called for his horse and rode away, and away, until he came to the
poor man's house, and there he found the poor man sitting at his
doorstep very sad and doleful.
"What is the matter, my friend?" asked he; and the poor man replied:
"May it please your honour, a little lass has just been born to our
house; and we have five children already, and where the bread is to come
from to fill the sixth mouth, we know not."
"If that be all your trouble," quoth the Baron readily, "mayhap I can
help you: so don't be down-hearted. I am just looking for such a little
lass to companion my son, so, if you will, I will give you ten crowns
for her."
Well! the man he nigh jumped for joy, since he was to get good money,
and his daughter, so he thought, a good home. Therefore he brought out
the child then and there, and the Baron, wrapping the babe in his cloak,
rode away. But when he got to the river he flung the little thing into
the swollen stream, and said to himself as he galloped back to his
castle:
"There goes Fate!"
But, you see, he was just sore mistaken. For the little lass didn't
sink. The stream was very swift, and her long clothes kept her up till
she caught in a snag just opposite a fisherman, who was mending his
nets.
Now the fisherman and his wife had no children, and they were just
longing for a baby; so when the goodman saw the little lass he was
overcome with joy, and took her home to his wife, who received her with
open arms.
And there she grew up, the apple of their eyes, into the most beautiful
maiden that ever was seen.
Now, when she was about fifteen years of age, it so happened that the
Baron and his friends went a-hunting along the banks of the river and
stopped to get a drink of water at the fisherman's hut. And who should
bring the water out but, as they thought, the fisherman's daughter.
Now the young men of the party noticed her beauty, and one of them said
to the Baron, "She should marry well; read us her fate, since you are so
learned in the art."
Then the Baron, scarce looking at her, said carelessly: "I could guess
her fate! Some wretched yokel or other. But, to please you, I will cast
her horoscope by the stars; so tell me, girl, what day you were born?"
"That I cannot tell, sir," replied the girl, "for I was picked up in the
river about fifteen years ago."
Then the Baron grew pale, for he guessed at once that she was the little
lass he had flung into the stream, and that Fate had been stronger than
he was. But he kept his own counsel and said nothing at the time.
Afterwards, however, he thought out a plan, so he rode back and gave the
girl a letter.
"See you!" he said. "I will make your fortune. Take this letter to my
brother, who needs a good girl, and you will be settled for life."
Now the fisherman and his wife were growing old and needed help; so the
girl said she would go, and took the letter.
And the Baron rode back to his castle saying to himself once more:
For what he had written in the letter was this:
"DEAR BROTHER,
"Take the bearer and put her to death immediately."
But once again he was sore mistaken; since on the way to the town where
his brother lived, the girl had to stop the night in a little inn. And
it so happened that that very night a gang of thieves broke into the
inn, and not content with carrying off all that the innkeeper possessed,
they searched the pockets of the guests, and found the letter which the
girl carried. And when they read it, they agreed that it was a mean
trick and a shame. So their captain sat down and, taking pen and paper,
wrote instead:
"Take the bearer and marry her to my son without delay."
Then, after putting the note into an envelope and sealing it up, they
gave it to the girl and bade her go on her way. So when she arrived at
the brother's castle, though rather surprised, he gave orders for a
wedding feast to be prepared. And the Baron's son, who was staying with
his uncle, seeing the girl's great beauty, was nothing loth, so they
were fast wedded.
Well! when the news was brought to the Baron, he was nigh beside
himself; but he was determined not to be done by Fate. So he rode
post-haste to his brother's and pretended to be quite pleased. And then
one day, when no one was nigh, he asked the young bride to come for a
walk with him, and when they were close to some cliffs, seized hold of
her, and was for throwing her over into the sea. But she begged hard for
her life.
"It is not my fault," she said. "I have done nothing. It is Fate. But if
you will spare my life I promise that I will fight against Fate also. I
will never see you or your son again until you desire it. That will be
safer for you; since, see you, the sea may preserve me, as the river
did."
Well! the Baron agreed to this. So he took off his gold ring from his
finger and flung it over the cliffs into the sea and said:
"Never dare to show me your face again till you can show me that ring
likewise."
And with that he let her go.
Well! the girl wandered on, and she wandered on, until she came to a
nobleman's castle; and there, as they needed a kitchen girl, she engaged
as a scullion, since she had been used to such work in the fisherman's
hut.
Now one day, as she was cleaning a big fish, she looked out of the
kitchen window, and who should she see driving up to dinner but the
Baron and his young son, her husband. At first she thought that, to keep
her promise, she must run away; but afterwards she remembered they would
not see her in the kitchen, so she went on with her cleaning of the big
fish.
And, lo and behold! she saw something shine in its inside, and there,
sure enough, was the Baron's ring! She was glad enough to see it, I can
tell you; so she slipped it on to her thumb. But she went on with her
work, and dressed the fish as nicely as ever she could, and served it up
as pretty as may be, with parsley sauce and butter.
Well! when it came to table the guests liked it so well that they asked
the host who cooked it. And he called to his servants, "Send up the cook
who cooked that fine fish, that she may get her reward."
Well! when the girl heard she was wanted she made herself ready, and
with the gold ring on her thumb, went boldly into the dining-hall. And
all the guests when they saw her were struck dumb by her wonderful
beauty. And the young husband started up gladly; but the Baron,
recognising her, jumped up angrily and looked as if he would kill her.
So, without one word, the girl held up her hand before his face, and the
gold ring shone and glittered on it; and she went straight up to the
Baron, and laid her hand with the ring on it before him on the table.
Then the Baron understood that Fate had been too strong for him; so he
took her by the hand, and, placing her beside him, turned to the guests
"This is my son's wife. Let us drink a toast in her honour."
And after dinner he took her and his son home to his castle, where they
all lived as happy as could be for ever afterwards.
[Illustration: Headpiece--Lawkamercyme]
    LAWKAMERCYME
    There was an old woman, as I've heard tell,
    She went to the market her eggs for to sell;
    She went to the market, all on a market-day,
    And she fell asleep on the king's highway.
    There came by a pedlar, whose name it was Stout,
    He cut all her petticoats all round about;
    He cut her petticoats up to the knees,
    Which made the old woman to shiver and freeze.
    When this old woman first did awake,
    She 'gan to shiver, she 'gan to shake;
    She 'gan to wonder, she 'gan to cry--
    "Lawkamercyme! this is none of I!
    "But if it be I, as I do hope it be,
    I've a little dog at home, and sure he'll know me;
    If it be I, he'll wag his little tail,
    And if it be not I, then he'll bark and wail."
    Home went the old woman, all in the dark;
    Up got the little dog, and he began to bark,
    He began to bark, and she began to cry--
    "Lawkamercyme! this is none of I!"
[Illustration: A funny-looking old gentleman engaged her and took her
home]
MASTER OF ALL MASTERS
A Girl once went to the fair to hire herself for servant. At last a
funny-looking old gentleman engaged her and took her home to his house.
When she got there, he told her that he had something to teach her, for
that in his house he had his own names for things.
He said to her, "What will you call me?"
"Master or mister, or whatever you please, sir," says she.
He said, "You must call me 'master of all masters.' And what would you
call this?" pointing to his bed.
"Bed or couch, or whatever you please, sir."
"No, that's my 'barnacle'. And what do you call these?" said he,
pointing to his pantaloons.
"Breeches or trousers, or whatever you please, sir."
"You must call them 'squibs and crackers.' And what would you call her?"
pointing to the cat.
"Cat or kit, or whatever you please, sir.'
"You must call her 'white-faced simminy' And this now," showing the
fire, "what would you call this?"
"Fire or flame, or whatever you please, sir."
"You must call it 'hot cockalorum'; and what this?" he went on, pointing
to the water.
"Water or wet, or whatever you please, sir."
"No, 'pondalorum' is its name. And what do you call all this?" asked he,
as he pointed to the house.
"House or cottage, or whatever you please, sir."
"You must call it 'high topper mountain.'"
That very night the servant woke her master up in a fright and said,
"Master of all masters, get out of your barnacle and put on your squibs
and crackers. For white-faced simminy has got a spark of hot cockalorum
on its tail, and unless you get some pondalorum high topper mountain
will be all on hot cockalorum...."
That's all!!
[Illustration: White-faced simminy has got a spark of hot cockalorum on
its tail]
MOLLY WHUPPIE AND THE DOUBLE-FACED GIANT
Once upon a time there was a man and his wife who were not over rich.
And they had so many children that they couldn't find meat for them; so,
as the three youngest were girls, they just took them out to the forest
one day, and left them there to fend for themselves as best they might.
Now the two eldest were just ordinary girls, so they cried a bit and
felt afraid; but the youngest, whose name was Molly Whuppie, was bold,
so she counselled her sisters not to despair, but to try and find some
house where they might get a night's lodging. So they set off through
the forest, and journeyed, and journeyed, and journeyed, but never a
house did they see. It began to grow dark, her sisters were faint with
hunger, and even Molly Whuppie began to think of supper. At last in the
distance they saw a great big light, and made for it. Now when they drew
near they saw that it came from a huge window in a huge house.
"It will be a giant's house," said the two elder girls, trembling with
"If there were two giants in it I mean to have my supper," quoth Molly
Whuppie, and knocked at a huge door, as bold as brass. It was opened by
the giant's wife, who shook her head when Molly Whuppie asked for
victuals and a night's lodging.
"You wouldn't thank me for it," she said, "for my man is a giant, and
when he comes home he will kill you of a certainty."
"But if you give us supper at once," says Molly craftily, "we shall have
finished it before the giant comes home; for we are very sharp-set."
Now the giant's wife was not unkindly; besides, her three daughters, who
were just of an age with Molly and her sisters, tugged at her skirts
well pleased; so she took the girls in, set them by the fire, and gave
them each a bowl of bread and milk. But they had hardly begun to gobble
it up before the door burst open, and a fearful giant strode in saying:
   I smell the smell of some earthly one."
"Don't put yourself about, my dear," said the giant's wife, trying to
make the best of it. "See for yourself. They are only three poor little
girlies like our girlies. They were cold and hungry so I gave them some
supper; but they have promised to go away as soon as they have
finished. Now be a good giant and don't touch them. They've eaten of
our salt, so don't you be at fault!"
Now this giant was not at all a straightforward giant. He was a
double-faced giant. So he only said,
  "Umph!"
and remarked that as they had come, they had better stay all night,
since they could easily sleep with his three daughters. And after he had
had his supper he made himself quite pleasant, and plaited chains of
straw for the little strangers to wear round their necks, to match the
gold chains his daughters wore. Then he wished them all pleasant dreams
and sent them to bed.
Dear me! He was a double-faced giant!
But Molly Whuppie, the youngest of the three girls, was not only bold,
she was clever. So when she was in bed, instead of going to sleep like
the others, she lay awake and thought, and thought, and thought; until
at last she up ever so softly, took off her own and her sisters' straw
chains, put them round the neck of the ogre's daughters, and placed
their gold chains round her own and her sisters' necks.
And even then she did not go to sleep, but lay still and waited to see
if she was wise; and she was! For in the very middle of the night, when
everybody else was dead asleep and it was pitch dark, in comes the
giant, all stealthy, feels for the straw chains, twists them tight round
the wearers' necks, half strangles his daughters, drags them on to the
floor, and beats them till they were quite dead; so, all stealthy and
satisfied, goes back to his own bed, thinking he had been very clever.
But he was no match, you see, for Molly Whuppie; for she at once roused
her sisters, bade them be quiet, and follow her. Then she slipped out of
the giant's house and ran, and ran, and ran until the dawn broke and
they found themselves before another great house. It was surrounded by a
wide deep moat, which was spanned by a drawbridge. But the drawbridge
was up. However, beside it hung a Single-Hair rope over which any one
very light-footed could cross.
Now Molly's sisters were feared to try it; besides, they said that for
aught they knew the house might be another giant's house, and they had
best keep away.
"Taste and try," says Molly Whuppie, laughing, and was over the Bridge
of a Single Hair before you could say knife. And, after all, it was not
a giant's house but a King's castle. Now it so happened that the very
giant whom Molly had tricked was the terror of the whole country-side,
and it was to gain safety from him that the drawbridge was kept up, and
the Bridge of a Single Hair had been made. So when the sentry heard
Molly Whuppie's tale, he took her to the King and said:
"My lord! Here is a girlie who has tricked the giant!"
Then the King when he had heard the story said, "You are a clever girl,
Molly Whuppie, and you managed very well; but if you could manage still
better and steal the giant's sword, in which part of his strength lies,
I will give your eldest sister in marriage to my eldest son."
Well! Molly Whuppie thought this would be a very good downsitting for
her sister, so she said she would try.
So that evening, all alone, she ran across the Bridge of One Hair, and
ran and ran till she came to the giant's house. The sun was just
setting, and shone on it so beautifully that Molly Whuppie thought it
looked like a castle in Spain, and could hardly believe that such a
dreadful, double-faced giant lived within. However, she knew he did; so
she slipped into the house unbeknownst, stole up to the giant's room,
and crept in behind the bed. By and by the giant came home, ate a huge
supper, and came crashing up the stairs to his bed. But Molly kept very
still and held her breath. So after a time he fell asleep, and soon he
began to snore. Then Molly crept out from under the bed, ever so softly,
and crept up the bed-clothes, and crept past his great snoring face, and
laid hold of the sword that hung above it. But alas! as she jumped from
the bed in a hurry, the sword rattled in the scabbard. The noise woke
the giant, and up he jumped and ran after Molly, who ran as she had
never run before, carrying the sword over her shoulder. And he ran, and
she ran, and they both ran, until they came to the Bridge of One Hair.
Then she fled over it light-footed, balancing the sword, but he
couldn't. So he stopped, foaming at the mouth with rage, and called
after her:
"Woe worth you, Molly Whuppie! Never you dare to come again!"
And she, turning her head about as she sped over the One Hair Bridge,
laughed lightly:
"Twice yet, gaffer, will I come to the Castle in Spain!"
So Molly gave the sword to the King, and, as he had promised, his eldest
son wedded her eldest sister.
But after the marriage festivities were over the King says again to
Molly Whuppie:
"You're a main clever girl, Molly, and you have managed very well, but
if you could manage still better and steal the giant's purse, in which
part of his strength lies, I will marry my second son to your second
sister. But you need to be careful, for the giant sleeps with the purse
under his pillow!"
Well! Molly Whuppie thought this would be a very good downsitting,
indeed, for her second sister, so she said she would try her luck.
So that evening, just at sunsetting, she ran over the One Hair Bridge,
and ran, and ran, and ran until she came to the giant's house looking
for all the world like a castle in the air, all ruddy and golden and
glinting. She could scarce believe such a dreadful double-faced giant
lived within. However, she knew he did; so she slipped into the house
unbeknownst, stole up to the giant's room, and crept in below the
giant's bed. By and by the giant came home, ate a hearty supper, and
then came crashing upstairs, and soon fell a-snoring. Then Molly Whuppie
slipped from under the bed, and slipped up the bed-clothes, and reaching
out her hand slipped it under the pillow, and got hold of the purse.
But the giant's head was so heavy on it she had to tug and tug away. At
last out it came, she fell backward over the bedside, the purse opened,
and some of the money fell out with a crash. The noise wakened the
giant, and she had only time to grab the money off the floor, when he
was after her. How they ran, and ran, and ran, and ran! At last she
reached the One Hair Bridge and, with the purse in one hand, the money
in the other, she sped across it while the giant shook his fist at her
and cried:
And she, turning her head, laughed lightly:
"Yet once more, gaffer, will I come to the Castle in Spain."
So she took the purse to the King, and he ordered a splendid marriage
feast for his second son and her second sister.
But after the wedding was over the King says to her, says he:
"Molly! You are the most main clever girl in the world; but if you would
do better yet, and steal me from his finger the giant's ring, in which
all his strength lies, I will give you my dearest, youngest, handsomest
son for yourself."
Now Molly thought the King's son was the nicest young prince she had
ever seen, so she said she would try, and that evening, all alone, she
sped across the One Hair Bridge as light as a feather, and ran, and ran,
and ran until she came to the giant's house all lit up with the red
setting sun like any castle in the air. And she slipped inside, stole
upstairs, and crept under the bed in no time. And the giant came in, and
supped, and crashed up to bed, and snored. Oh! he snored louder than
ever!
But you know he was a double-faced giant; so perhaps he snored louder
on purpose. For no sooner had Molly Whuppie began to tug at his ring
than ... My!...
He had her fast between his finger and thumb. And he sate up in bed, and
shook his head at her and said, "Molly Whuppie, you are a main clever
girl! Now, if I had done as much ill to you as you have done to me, what
would you do to me?"
Then Molly thought for a moment and she said, "I'd put you in a sack,
and I'd put the cat inside with you, and I'd put the dog inside with
you, and I'd put a needle and thread and a pair of shears inside with
you, and I'd hang you up on a nail, and I'd go to the wood and cut the
thickest stick I could get, and come home and take you down and bang
you, and bang, and bang, and bang you till you were dead!"
"Right you are!" cried the giant gleefully, "and that's just what I'll
do to you!"
So he got a sack and put Molly into it with the dog and the cat, and the
needle and thread and the shears, and hung her on a nail in the wall,
and went out to the wood to choose a stick.
Then Molly Whuppie began to laugh like anything, and the dog joined in
with barks, and the cat with mews.
Now the giant's wife was sitting in the next room, and when she heard
the commotion she went in to see what was up.
"Whatever is the matter?" quoth she.
"Nothing, 'm," quoth Molly Whuppie from inside the sack, laughing like
anything. "Ho, ho! Ha, ha! If you saw what we see you'd laugh too. Ho,
ho! Ha, ha!"
And no matter how the giant's wife begged to know what she saw, there
never was any answer but, "Ho, ho! Ha, ha! Could ye but see what I
see!!!"
At last the giant's wife begged Molly to let her see, so Molly took the
shears, cut a hole in the sack, jumped out, helped the giant's wife in,
and sewed up the hole! For of course she hadn't forgotten to take out
the needle and thread with her.
Now, just at that very moment, the giant burst in, and Molly had barely
time to hide behind the door before he rushed at the sack, tore it down,
and began to batter it with a huge tree he had cut in the wood.
"Stop! stop!" cried his wife. "It's me! It's me!"
But he couldn't hear, for, see you, the dog and the cat had tumbled one
on the top of the other, and such a growling and spitting, and yelling
and caterwauling you never heard! It was fair deafening, and the giant
would have gone on battering till his wife was dead had he not caught
sight of Molly Whuppie escaping with the ring which he had left on the
table.
Well, he threw down the tree and ran after her. Never was such a race.
They ran, and they ran, and they ran, and they ran, until they came to
the One Hair Bridge. And then, balancing herself with the ring like a
hoop, Molly Whuppie sped over the bridge light as a feather, but the
giant had to stand on the other side, and shake his fist at her, and cry
louder than ever:
And she, turning her head back as she sped, laughed gaily:
"Never more, gaffer, will I come to the castle in the air!"
So she took the ring to the King, and she and the handsome young prince
were married, and no one ever saw the double-faced giant again.
THE ASS, THE TABLE, AND THE STICK
A lad named Jack was once so unhappy at home through his father's
ill-treatment, that he made up his mind to run away and seek his fortune
in the wide world.
He ran, and he ran, till he could run no longer, and then he ran right
up against a little old woman who was gathering sticks. He was too much
out of breath to beg pardon, but the woman was good-natured, and she
said he seemed to be a likely lad, so she would take him to be her
servant, and would pay him well. He agreed, for he was very hungry, and
she brought him to her house in the wood, where he served her for a
twelvemonths and a day. When the year had passed, she called him to her,
and said she had good wages for him. So she presented him with an ass
out of the stable, and he had but to pull Neddy's ears to make him begin
at once to hee-haw! And when he brayed there dropped from his mouth
silver sixpences, and half-crowns, and golden guineas.
The lad was well pleased with the wage he had received, and away he rode
till he reached an inn. There he ordered the best of everything, and
when the innkeeper refused to serve him without being paid beforehand,
the boy went off to the stable, pulled the ass's ears, and obtained his
pocket full of money. The host had watched all this through a crack in
the door, and when night came on he put an ass of his own for the
precious Neddy belonging to the youth. So Jack, without knowing that any
change had been made, rode away next morning to his father's house.
Now I must tell you that near his home dwelt a poor widow with an only
daughter. The lad and the maiden were fast friends and true-loves. So
when Jack returned he asked his father's leave to marry the girl.
"Never till you have the money to keep her," was the reply.
"I have that, father," said the lad, and going to the ass he pulled its
long ears; well, he pulled, and he pulled, till one of them came off in
his hands; but Neddy, though he hee-hawed and he hee-hawed, let fall no
half-crowns or guineas. Then the father picked up a hayfork and beat his
son out of the house.
I promise you he ran; he ran and ran till he came bang against a door,
and burst it open, and there he was in a joiner's shop. "You're a likely
lad," said the joiner; "serve me for a twelvemonths and a day and I will
pay you well." So he agreed, and served the carpenter for a year and a
day. "Now," said the master, "I will give you your wage"; and he
presented him with a table, telling him he had but to say, "Table, be
covered," and at once it would be spread with lots to eat and drink.
Jack hitched the table on his back, and away he went with it till he
came to the inn. "Well, host," shouted he, putting down the table, "my
dinner to-day, and that of the best."
"Very sorry, sir," says the host, "but there is nothing in the house but
ham and eggs."
"No ham and eggs for me!" exclaimed Jack. "I can do better than
that.--Come, my table, be covered!"
So at once the table was spread with turkey and sausages, roast mutton,
potatoes, and greens. The innkeeper opened his eyes, but he said
nothing, not he! But that night he fetched down from his attic a table
very like the magic one, and exchanged the two, and Jack, none the
wiser, next morning hitched the worthless table on to his back and
carried it home.
"Now, father, may I marry my lass?" he asked.
"Not unless you can keep her," replied the father.
"Look here!" exclaimed Jack. "Father, I have a table which does all my
bidding."
"Let me see it," said the old man.
The lad set it in the middle of the room, and bade it be covered; but
all in vain, the table remained bare. Then, in a rage, the father caught
the warming-pan down from the wall and warmed his son's back with it so
that the boy fled howling from the house, and ran and ran till he came
to a river and tumbled in. A man picked him out and bade him help in
making a bridge over the river by casting a tree across. Then Jack
climbed up to the top of the tree and threw his weight on it, so that
when the man had rooted the tree up, Jack and the tree-head dropped on
the farther bank.
[Illustration: The fisherman and his wife had no children, and they were
just longing for a baby]
"Thank you," said the man; "and now for what you have done I will pay
you"; so saying, he tore a branch from the tree, and fettled it up into
a club with his knife. "There," exclaimed he; "take this stick, and when
you say to it, 'Up, stick, and bang him,' it will knock any one down who
angers you."
The lad was overjoyed to get this stick, for he had begun to see he had
been tricked by the innkeeper, so away he went with it to the inn, and
as soon as the man appeared he cried:
"Up, stick, and bang him!"
At the word the cudgel flew from his hand and battered the old fellow on
the back, rapped his head, bruised his arms, tickled his ribs, till he
fell groaning on the floor; and still the stick belaboured the prostrate
man, nor would Jack call it off till he had got back the stolen ass and
table. Then he galloped home on the ass, with the table on his
shoulders, and the stick in his hand. When he arrived there he found his
father was dead, so he brought his ass into the stable, and pulled its
ears till he had filled the manger with money.
It was soon known through the town that Jack had returned rolling in
wealth, and accordingly all the girls in the place set their caps at
"Now," said Jack, "I shall marry the richest lass in the place; so
to-morrow do you all come in front of my house with your money in your
aprons."
Next morning the street was full of girls with aprons held out, and
gold and silver in them; but Jack's own sweetheart was among them, and
she had neither gold nor silver; nought but two copper pennies, that was
all she had.
"Stand aside, lass," said Jack to her, speaking roughly. "Thou hast no
silver nor gold--stand off from the rest." She obeyed, and the tears ran
down her cheeks, and filled her apron with diamonds.
"Up, stick, and bang them!" exclaimed Jack; whereupon the cudgel leaped
up, and running along the line of girls, knocked them all on the heads
and left them senseless on the pavement. Jack took all their money and
poured it into his true-love's lap. "Now, lass," he exclaimed, "thou art
the richest, and I shall marry thee."
THE WELL OF THE WORLD'S END
time, nor in your time, nor any one else's time, there was a girl whose
mother had died, and her father had married again. And her stepmother
hated her because she was more beautiful than she was. And she was very
cruel to her; she used to make her do all the servant's work, and never
let her have any peace. At last, one day, the stepmother thought to get
rid of her altogether; so she handed her a sieve and said to her:
"Go, fill it at the Well of the World's End and bring it home to me
full, or woe betide you." For she thought she would never be able to
find the Well of the World's End, and, if she did, how could she bring
home a sieve full of water?
Well, the girl started off, and asked every one she met to tell her
where was the Well of the World's End. But nobody knew, and she didn't
know what to do, when a queer little old woman, all bent double, told
her where it was, and how she could get to it. So she did what the old
woman told her, and at last arrived at the Well of the World's End. But
when she dipped the sieve in the cold cold water, it all ran out again.
She tried and she tried again, but every time it was the same; and at
last she sate down and cried as if her heart would break.
Suddenly she heard a croaking voice, and she looked up and saw a great
frog with goggle eyes looking at her and speaking to her.
"What's the matter, dearie?" it said.
"Oh dear! oh dear!" she said, "my stepmother has sent me all this long
way to fill this sieve with water from the Well of the World's End, and
I can't fill it no how at all."
"Well," said the frog, "if you promise me to do whatever I bid you for a
whole night long, I'll tell you how to fill it."
So the girl agreed, and then the frog said:
  "Stop it with moss and daub it with clay,
   And then it will carry the water away";
and then it gave a hop, skip, and jump, and went flop into the Well of
the World's End.
So the girl looked about for some moss, and lined the bottom of the
sieve with it, and over that she put some clay, and then she dipped it
once-again into the Well of the World's End; and this time the water
didn't run out, and she turned to go away.
Just then the frog popped up its head out of the Well of the World's
End, and said, "Remember your promise."
"All right," said the girl; for, thought she, "what harm can a frog do
So she went back to her stepmother, and brought the sieve full of water
from the Well of the World's End. The stepmother was angry as angry, but
she said nothing at all.
That very evening they heard something tap-tapping at the door low down,
and a voice cried out:
  "Open the door, my hinny, my heart,
     Open the door, my own darling;
   Remember the words that you and I spoke,
     At the World's End Well but this morning."
"Whatever can that be?" cried out the stepmother.
Then the girl had to tell her all about it, and what she had promised
the frog.
"Girls must keep their promises," said the stepmother, who was glad the
girl would have to obey a nasty frog. "Go and open the door this
instant."
So the girl went and opened the door, and there was the frog from the
Well of the World's End. And it hopped, and it hopped, and it jumped,
till it reached the girl, and then it said:
  "Lift me up, my hinny, my heart,
     Lift to your knee, my own darling;
But the girl would not do the frog's bidding, till her stepmother said,
"Lift it up this instant, you hussy! Girls must keep their promises!"
So she lifted the frog up on to her lap, and it lay there comfortably
for a time; till at last it said:
  "Give me some supper, my hinny, my heart,
     Give me some supper, my darling;
   Remember the words you and I spoke,
Well, that she did not mind doing, so she got it a bowl of milk and
bread, and fed it well. But when the frog had finished, it said:
  "Take me to bed, my hinny, my heart,
     Take me to bed, my own darling;
   Remember the promise you promised to me,
But that the girl refused to do, till her stepmother said harshly:
"Do what you promised, girl; girls must keep their promises. Do what
you're bid, or out you go, you and your froggie."
So the girl took the frog with her to bed, and kept it as far away from
her as she could. Well, just as the day was beginning to break, what
should the frog say but:
  "Chop off my head, my hinny, my heart,
     Chop off my head, my own darling;
At first the girl wouldn't, for she thought of what the frog had done
for her at the Well of the World's End. But when the frog said the words
over and over again in a pleading voice, she went and took an axe and
chopped off its head, and, lo and behold! there stood before her a
handsome young prince, who told her that he had been enchanted by a
wicked magician, and he could never be unspelled till some girl would do
his bidding for a whole night, and chop off his head at the end of it.
The stepmother was surprised indeed when she found the young prince
instead of the nasty frog, and she was not best pleased, you may be
sure, when the prince told her that he was going to marry her
stepdaughter because she had unspelled him. But married they were, and
went away to live in the castle of the king, his father; and all the
stepmother had to console her was, that it was all through her that
her stepdaughter was married to a prince.
THE ROSE TREE
Once upon a time, long long years ago, in the days when one had to be
careful about witches, there lived a good man, whose young wife died,
leaving him a baby girl.
Now this good man felt he could not look after the baby properly, so he
married a young woman whose husband had died leaving her with a baby
boy.
Thus the two children grew up together, and loved each other dearly,
dearly.
But the boy's mother was really a wicked witch-woman, and so jealous
that she wanted all the boy's love for herself, and when the girl-baby
grew white as milk, with cheeks like roses and lips like cherries, and
when her hair, shining like golden silk, hung down to her feet so that
her father and all the neighbours began to praise her looks, the
stepmother fairly hated her, and did all in her power to spoil her
looks. She would set the child hard tasks, and send her out in all
weathers to do difficult messages, and if they were not well performed
would beat her and scold her cruelly.
Now one cold winter evening when the snow was drifting fast, and the
wild rose tree in the garden under which the children used to play in
summer was all brown and barren save for snowflake flowers, the
stepmother said to the little girl:
"Child! go and buy me a bunch of candles at the grocer's. Here is some
money; go quickly, and don't loiter by the way."
So the little girl took the money and set off quickly through the snow,
for already it was growing dark. Now there was such a wind blowing that
it nearly blew her off her feet, and as she ran her beautiful hair got
all tangled and almost tripped her up. However, she got the candles,
paid for them, and started home again. But this time the wind was behind
her and blew all her beautiful golden hair in front of her like a cloud,
so that she could not see her steps, and, coming to a stile, had to stop
and put down the bundle of candles in order to see how to get over it.
And when she was climbing it a big black dog came by and ran off with
the bunch of candles! Now she was so afraid of her stepmother that she
durst not go home, but turned back and bought another bunch of candles
at the grocer's, and when she arrived at the stile once more, the same
thing happened. A big black dog came down the road and ran away with the
bunch of candles. So yet once again she journeyed back to the grocer's
through wind and snow, and, with her last penny, bought yet another
bunch of candles. To no purpose, for alas, and alack-a-day! when she
laid them down in order to part her beautiful golden hair and to see how
to get over the stile, a big black dog ran away with them.
So nothing was left save to go back to her stepmother in fear and
trembling. But, for a wonder, her stepmother did not seem very angry.
She only scolded her for being so late, for, see you, her father and her
little playmate had gone to their beds and were in the Land of Nod.
Then she said to the child, "I must take the tangles out of your hair
before you go to sleep. Come, put your head on my lap."
So the little girl put her head on her stepmother's lap, and, lo and
behold! her beautiful yellow-silk hair rolled right over the woman's
knees and lay upon the ground.
Then the beauty of it made the stepmother more jealous than before, so
she said, "I cannot part your hair properly on my knee, fetch me a
billet of wood."
So the little girl fetched one. Then said the stepmother, "Your hair is
so thick I cannot part it with a comb; fetch me an axe!"
So the child fetched an axe.
"Now," said that wicked, wicked woman, "lay your head down on the billet
while I part your hair."
And the child did as she was bid without fear; and lo! the beautiful
little golden head was off in a second, by one blow of the axe.
Now the wicked stepmother had thought it all out before, so she took the
poor little dead girl out to the garden, dug a hollow in the snow under
the rose tree, and said to herself, "When spring comes and the snow
melts if people find her bones, they will say she lost her way and fell
asleep in the snow."
But first, because she was a wicked witch-woman, knowing spells and
charms, she took out the heart of the little girl and made it into two
savoury pasties, one for her husband's breakfast and one for the little
boy's, for thus would the love they bore to the little girl become hers.
Nevertheless, she was mistaken, for when morning came and the little
child could not be found, the father sent away his breakfast barely
tasted, and the little boy wept so that he could eat nothing.
So they grieved and grieved. And when the snow melted and they found the
bones of the poor child, they said, "She must have lost her way that
dark night going to the grocer's to buy candles." So they buried the
bones under the children's rose tree, and every day the little boy sate
there and wept and wept for his lost playmate.
Now when summer came the wild rose tree flowered. It was covered with
white roses, and amongst the flowers there sate a beautiful white bird.
And it sang and sang and sang like an angel out of heaven; but what it
sang the little boy could never make out, for he could hardly see for
weeping, hardly hear for sobbing.
So at last the beautiful white bird unfolded its broad white wings and
flew to a cobbler's shop, where a myrtle bush hung over the man and his
last, on which he was making a dainty little pair of rose-red shoes.
Then it perched on a bough and sang ever so sweetly:
  "Stepmother slew me,
   Father nigh ate me,
   He whom I dearly love
   Sits below, I sing above,
   Stick! Stock! Stone dead!"
"Sing that beautiful song again," said the cobbler. "It is better than a
nightingale's."
"That will I gladly," sang the bird, "if you will give me the little
rose-red shoes you are making."
And the cobbler gave them willingly, so the white bird sang its song
once more. Then with the rose-red shoes in one foot it flew to an ash
tree that grew close beside a goldsmith's bench, and sang:
"Oh, what a beautiful song!" cried the goldsmith.
"Sing again, dear bird, it is sweeter than a nightingale's."
"That will I gladly," sang the bird, "if you will give me the gold chain
you're making."
And the goldsmith gave the bauble willingly, and the bird sang its song
once more. Then with the rose-red shoes in one foot and the golden chain
in the other, the bird flew to an oak tree which overhung the mill
stream, beside which three millers were busy picking out a millstone,
and, perching on a bough, sang its song ever so sweetly:
  "My stepmother slew me,
   My father nigh ate me,
   Stick!--"
Just then one of the millers put down his tool and listened.
"Stock!" sang the bird.
And the second miller put aside his tool and listened.
"Stone," sang the bird.
Then the third miller put aside his tool and listened.
"Dead!" sang the bird so sweetly that with one accord the millers looked
up and cried with one voice:
"Oh, what a beautiful song! Sing it again, dear bird, it is sweeter than
a nightingale's."
"That will I gladly," answered the bird, "if you will hang the millstone
you are picking round my neck."
So the millers hung it as they were asked; and when the song was
finished, the bird spread its wide white wings and, with the millstone
round its neck and the little rose-red shoes in one foot, the golden
chain in the other, it flew back to the rose tree. But the little
playmate was not there; he was inside the house eating his dinner.
Then the bird flew to the house, and rattled the millstone about the
eaves until the stepmother cried, "Hearken! How it thunders!"
So the little boy ran out to see, and down dropped the dainty rose-red
shoes at his feet.
"See what fine things the thunder has brought!" he cried with glee as he
ran back.
Then the white bird rattled the millstone about the eaves once more, and
once again the stepmother said, "Hearken! How it thunders!"
So this time the father went out to see, and down dropped the golden
chain about his neck.
"It is true," he said when he came back. "The thunder does bring fine
things!"
Then once more the white bird rattled the millstone about the eaves, and
this time the stepmother said hurriedly, "Hark! there it is again!
Perhaps it has got something for me!"
Then she ran out; but the moment she stepped outside the door, down fell
the millstone right on her head and killed her.
So that was an end of her. And after that the little boy was ever so
much happier, and all the summer time he sate with his little
rose-coloured shoes under the wild rose tree and listened to the white
bird's song. But when winter came and the wild rose tree was all barren
and bare save for snowflake flowers, the white bird came no longer and
the little boy grew tired of waiting for it. So one day he gave up
altogether, and they buried him under the rose tree beside his little
playmate.
Now when the spring came and the rose tree blossomed, the flowers were
no longer white. They were edged with rose colour like the little boy's
shoes, and in the centre of each blossom there was a beautiful tuft of
golden silk like the little girl's hair.
And if you look in a wild rose you will find these things there still.
THE GOLDEN BEETLE OR WHY THE DOG HATES THE CAT
"What we shall eat to-morrow, I haven't the slightest idea!" said Widow
Wang to her eldest son, as he started out one morning in search of work.
"Oh, the gods will provide. I'll find a few coppers somewhere," replied
the boy, trying to speak cheerfully, although in his heart he also had
not the slightest idea in which direction to turn.
The winter had been a hard one: extreme cold, deep snow, and violent
winds. The Wang house had suffered greatly. The roof had fallen in,
weighed down by heavy snow. Then a hurricane had blown a wall over, and
Ming-li, the son, up all night and exposed to a bitter cold wind, had
caught pneumonia. Long days of illness followed, with the spending of
extra money for medicine. All their scant savings had soon melted away,
and at the shop where Ming-li had been employed his place was filled by
another. When at last he arose from his sick-bed he was too weak for
hard labour and there seemed to be no work in the neighbouring villages
for him to do. Night after night he came home, trying not to be
discouraged, but in his heart feeling the deep pangs of sorrow that come
to the good son who sees his mother suffering for want of food and
clothing.
"Bless his good heart!" said the poor widow after he had gone. "No
mother ever had a better boy. I hope he is right in saying the gods will
provide. It has been getting so much worse these past few weeks that it
seems now as if my stomach were as empty as a rich man's brain. Why,
even the rats have deserted our cottage, and there's nothing left for
poor Tabby, while old Blackfoot is nearly dead from starvation."
When the old woman referred to the sorrows of her pets, her
remarks were answered by a pitiful mewing and woebegone barking
from the corner where the two unfed creatures were curled up together
trying to keep warm.
Just then there was a loud knocking at the gate. When the widow Wang
called out, "Come in!" she was surprised to see an old bald-headed
priest standing in the doorway. "Sorry, but we have nothing," she went
on, feeling sure the visitor had come in search of food. "We have fed on
scraps these two weeks--on scraps and scrapings--and now we are living
on the memories of what we used to have when my son's father was living.
Our cat was so fat she couldn't climb to the roof. Now look at her. You
can hardly see her, she's so thin. No, I'm sorry we can't help you,
friend priest, but you see how it is."
"I didn't come for alms," cried the clean-shaven one, looking at her
kindly, "but only to see what I could do to help you. The gods have
listened long to the prayers of your devoted son. They honour him
because he has not waited till you die to do sacrifice for you. They
have seen how faithfully he has served you ever since his illness, and
now, when he is worn out and unable to work, they are resolved to reward
him for his virtue. You likewise have been a good mother and shall
receive the gift I am now bringing."
"What do you mean?" faltered Mrs. Wang, hardly believing her ears at
hearing a priest speak of bestowing mercies. "Have you come here to
laugh at our misfortunes?"
"By no means. Here in my hand I hold a tiny golden beetle which you will
find has a magic power greater than any you ever dreamed of. I will
leave this precious thing with you, a present from the god of filial
conduct."
"Yes, it will sell for a good sum," murmured the other, looking closely
at the trinket, "and will give us millet for several days. Thanks, good
priest, for your kindness."
"But you must by no means sell this golden beetle, for it has the power
to fill your stomachs as long as you live."
The widow stared in open-mouthed wonder at the priest's surprising
"Yes, you must not doubt me, but listen carefully to what I tell you.
Whenever you wish food, you have only to place this ornament in a kettle
of boiling water, saying over and over again the names of what you want
to eat. In three minutes take off the lid, and there will be your
dinner, smoking hot, and cooked more perfectly than any food you have
ever eaten."
"May I try it now?" she asked eagerly.
"As soon as I am gone."
When the door was shut, the old woman hurriedly kindled a fire, boiled
some water, and then dropped in the golden beetle, repeating these words
again and again:
  "Dumplings, dumplings, come to me,
   I am thin as thin can be.
   Dumplings, dumplings, smoking hot,
   Dumplings, dumplings, fill the pot."
Would those three minutes never pass? Could the priest have told the
truth? Her old head was nearly wild with excitement as clouds of steam
rose from the kettle. Off came the lid! She could wait no longer. Wonder
of wonders! There before her unbelieving eyes was a pot, full to the
brim of pork dumplings, dancing up and down in the bubbling water, the
best, the most delicious dumplings she had ever tasted. She ate and ate
till there was no room left in her greedy stomach, and then she feasted
the cat and the dog until they were ready to burst.
"Good fortune has come at last," whispered Blackfoot, the dog, to
Whitehead, the cat, as they lay down to sun themselves outside. "I fear
I couldn't have held out another week without running away to look for
food. I don't know just what's happened, but there's no use questioning
the gods."
Mrs. Wang fairly danced for joy at the thought of her son's return and
of how she would feast him.
"Poor boy, how surprised he will be at our fortune--and it's all on
account of his goodness to his old mother."
When Ming-li came, with a dark cloud overhanging his brow, the widow saw
plainly that disappointment was written there.
"Come, come, lad!" she cried cheerily, "clear up your face and smile,
for the gods have been good to us and I shall soon show you how richly
your devotion has been rewarded." So saying, she dropped the golden
beetle into the boiling water and stirred up the fire.
Thinking his mother had gone stark mad for want of food, Ming-li stared
solemnly at her. Anything was preferable to this misery. Should he sell
his last outer garment for a few pennies and buy millet for her?
Blackfoot licked his hand comfortingly, as if to say, "Cheer up, master,
fortune has turned in our favour." Whitehead leaped upon a bench,
purring like a sawmill.
Ming-li did not have long to wait. Almost in the twinkling of an eye he
heard his mother crying out,
"Sit down at the table, son, and eat these dumplings while they are
smoking hot."
Could he have heard correctly? Did his ears deceive him? No, there on
the table was a huge platter full of the delicious pork dumplings he
liked better than anything else in all the world, except, of course, his
"Eat and ask no questions," counselled the Widow Wang. "When you are
satisfied I will tell you everything."
Wise advice! Very soon the young man's chopsticks were twinkling like
a little star in the verses. He ate long and happily, while his good
mother watched him, her heart overflowing with joy at seeing him at last
able to satisfy his hunger. But still the old woman could hardly wait
for him to finish, she was so anxious to tell him her wonderful secret.
"Here, son!" she cried at last, as he began to pause between mouthfuls,
"look at my treasure!" And she held out to him the golden beetle.
"First tell me what good fairy of a rich man has been filling our hands
with silver?"
"That's just what I am trying to tell you," she laughed, "for there was
a fairy here this afternoon sure enough, only he was dressed like a bald
priest. That golden beetle is all he gave me, but with it comes a secret
worth thousands of cash to us."
The youth fingered the trinket idly, still doubting his senses, and
waiting impatiently for the secret of his delicious dinner. "But,
mother, what has this brass bauble to do with the dumplings, these
wonderful pork dumplings, the finest I ever ate?"
"Baubles indeed! Brass! Fie, fie, my boy! You little know what you are
saying. Only listen and you shall hear a tale that will open your eyes."
She then told him what had happened, and ended by setting all of the
left-over dumplings upon the floor for Blackfoot and Whitehead, a thing
her son had never seen her do before, for they had been miserably poor
and had had to save every scrap for the next meal.
Now began a long period of perfect happiness. Mother, son, dog and
cat--all enjoyed themselves to their hearts' content. All manner of new
foods such as they had never tasted were called forth from the pot by
the wonderful little beetle. Bird-nest soup, shark's fins, and a hundred
other delicacies were theirs for the asking, and soon Ming-li regained
all his strength, but, I fear, at the same time grew somewhat lazy, for
it was no longer necessary for him to work. As for the two animals, they
became fat and sleek and their hair grew long and glossy.
[Illustration: "HERE SON!" SHE CRIED, "HAVE A LOOK AT MY TREASURE!"]
But alas! according to a Chinese proverb, pride invites sorrow. The
little family became so proud of their good fortune that they began to
ask friends and relatives to dinner that they might show off their good
meals. One day a Mr. and Mrs. Chu came from a distant village. They were
much astonished at seeing the high style in which the Wangs lived. They
had expected a beggar's meal, but went away with full stomachs.
"It's the best stuff I ever ate," said Mr. Chu, as they entered their
own tumble-down house.
"Yes, and I know where it came from," exclaimed his wife. "I saw Widow
Wang take a little gold ornament out of the pot and hide it in a
cupboard. It must be some sort of charm, for I heard her mumbling to
herself about pork and dumplings just as she was stirring up the fire."
"A charm, eh? Why is it that other people have all the luck? It looks as
if we were doomed forever to be poor."
"Why not borrow Mrs. Wang's charm for a few days until we can pick up a
little flesh to keep our bones from clattering? Turn about's fair play.
Of course, we'll return it sooner or later."
"Doubtless they keep very close watch over it. When would you find them
away from home, now that they don't have to work any more? As their
house only contains one room, and that no bigger than ours, it would be
difficult to borrow this golden trinket. It is harder, for more reasons
than one, to steal from a beggar than from a king."
"Luck is surely with us," cried Mrs. Chu, clapping her hands. "They are
going this very day to the Temple fair. I overheard Mrs. Wang tell her
son that he must not forget he was to take her about the middle of the
afternoon. I will slip back then and borrow the little charm from the
box in which she hid it."
"Aren't you afraid of Blackfoot?"
"Pooh! he's so fat he can do nothing but roll. If the widow comes back
suddenly, I'll tell her I came to look for my big hair-pin, that I lost
it while I was at dinner."
"All right, go ahead, only of course we must remember we're borrowing
the thing, not stealing it, for the Wangs have always been good friends
to us, and then, too, we have just dined with them."
So skilfully did this crafty woman carry out her plans that within an
hour she was back in her own house, gleefully showing the priest's charm
to her husband. Not a soul had seen her enter the Wang house. The dog
had made no noise, and the cat had only blinked her surprise at seeing a
stranger and had gone to sleep again on the floor.
Great was the clamour and weeping when, on returning from the fair in
expectation of a hot supper, the widow found her treasure missing. It
was long before she could grasp the truth. She went back to the little
box in the cupboard ten times before she could believe it was empty, and
the room looked as if a cyclone had struck it, so long and carefully did
the two unfortunates hunt for the lost beetle.
Then came days of hunger which were all the harder to bear since the
recent period of good food and plenty. Oh, if they had only not got used
to such dainties! How hard it was to go back to scraps and scrapings!
But if the widow and her son were sad over the loss of the good meals,
the two pets were even more so. They were reduced to beggary and had to
go forth daily upon the streets in search of stray bones and refuse that
decent dogs and cats turned up their noses at.
One day, after this period of starvation had been going on for some
time, Whitehead began suddenly to frisk about in great excitement.
"Whatever is the matter with you?" growled Blackfoot. "Are you mad from
hunger, or have you caught another flea?"
"I was just thinking over our affairs, and now I know the cause of all
our trouble."
"Do you indeed?" sneered Blackfoot.
"Yes, I do indeed, and you'd better think twice before you mock me, for
I hold your future in my paw, as you will very soon see."
"Well, you needn't get angry about nothing. What wonderful discovery
have you made--that every rat has one tail?"
"First of all, are you willing to help me bring good fortune back to our
family?"
"Of course I am. Don't be silly," barked the dog, wagging his tail
joyfully at the thought of another good dinner. "Surely! surely! I will
do anything you like if it will bring Dame Fortune back again."
"All right. Here is the plan. There has been a thief in the house who
has stolen our mistress's golden beetle. You remember all our big
dinners that came from the pot? Well, every day I saw our mistress take
a little golden beetle out of the black box and put it into the pot. One
day she held it up before me, saying, 'Look, puss, there is the cause of
all our happiness. Don't you wish it was yours?' Then she laughed and
put it back into the box that stays in the cupboard."
"Is that true?" questioned Blackfoot. "Why didn't you say something
about it before?"
"You remember the day Mr. and Mrs. Chu were here, and how Mrs. Chu
returned in the afternoon after master and mistress had gone to the
fair? I saw her, out of the tail of my eye, go to that very black box
and take out the golden beetle. I thought it curious, but never dreamed
she was a thief. Alas! I was wrong! She took the beetle, and if I am not
mistaken, she and her husband are now enjoying the feasts that belong
to us."
"Let's claw them," growled Blackfoot, gnashing his teeth.
"That would do no good," counselled the other, "for they would be sure
to come out best in the end. We want the beetle back--that's the main
thing. We'll leave revenge to human beings; it is none of our business."
"What do you suggest?" said Blackfoot. "I am with you through thick and
thin."
"Let's go to the Chu house and make off with the beetle."
"Alas, that I am not a cat!" moaned Blackfoot. "If we go there I
couldn't get inside, for robbers always keep their gates well locked. If
I were like you I could scale the wall. It is the first time in all my
life I ever envied a cat."
"We will go together," continued Whitehead. "I will ride on your back
when we are fording the river, and you can protect me from strange
animals. When we get to the Chu house, I will climb over the wall and
manage the rest of the business myself. Only you must wait outside to
help me to get home with the prize."
No sooner arranged than done. The companions set out that very night on
their adventure. They crossed the river as the cat had suggested, and
Blackfoot really enjoyed the swim, for, as he said, it took him back to
his puppyhood, while the cat did not get a single drop of water on her
face. It was midnight when they reached the Chu house.
"Just wait till I return," purred Whitehead in Blackfoot's ear.
With a mighty spring she reached the top of the mud wall, and then
jumped down to the inside court. While she was resting in the shadow,
trying to decide just how to go about her work, a slight rustling
attracted her attention, and pop! one giant spring, one stretch-out of
the claws, and she had caught a rat that had just come out of his hole
for a drink and a midnight walk.
Now, Whitehead was so hungry that she would have made short work of this
tempting prey if the rat had not opened its mouth and, to her amazement,
begun to talk in good cat dialect.
"Pray, good puss, not so fast with your sharp teeth! Kindly be careful
with your claws! Don't you know it is the custom now to put prisoners on
their honour? I will promise not to run away."
"Pooh! what honour has a rat?"
"Most of us haven't much, I grant you, but my family was brought up
under the roof of Confucius, and there we picked up so many crumbs of
wisdom that we are exceptions to the rule. If you will spare me, I will
obey you for life, in fact, will be your humble slave." Then, with a
quick jerk, freeing itself, "See, I am loose now, but honour holds me as
if I were tied, and so I make no further attempt to get away."
"Much good it would do you," purred Whitehead, her fur crackling
noisily, and her mouth watering for a taste of rat steak. "However,
I am quite willing to put you to the test. First, answer a few polite
questions and I will see if you're a truthful fellow. What kind of food
is your master eating now, that you should be so round and plump when
I am thin and scrawny?"
"Oh, we have been in luck lately, I can tell you. Master and mistress
feed on the fat of the land, and of course we hangers-on get the
crumbs."
"But this is a poor tumble-down house. How can they afford such eating?"
"That is a great secret, but as I am in honour bound to tell you, here
goes. My mistress has just obtained in some manner or other, a fairy's
charm----"
"She stole it from our place," hissed the cat, "I will claw her eyes out
if I get the chance. Why, we've been fairly starving for want of that
beetle. She stole it from us just after she had been an invited guest!
What do you think of that for honour, Sir Rat? Were your mistress's
ancestors followers of the sage?"
"Oh, oh, oh! Why, that explains everything!" wailed the rat. "I have
often wondered how they got the golden beetle, and yet of course I dared
not ask any questions."
"No, certainly not! But hark you, friend rat--you get that golden
trinket back for me, and I will set you free at once of all obligations.
Do you know where she hides it?"
"Yes, in a crevice where the wall is broken. I will bring it to you in
a jiffy, but how shall we exist when our charm is gone? There will be
a season of scanty food, I fear; beggars' fare for all of us."
"Live on the memory of your good deed," purred the cat. "It is splendid,
you know, to be an honest beggar. Now scoot! I trust you completely,
since your people lived in the home of Confucius. I will wait here for
your return. Ah!" laughed Whitehead to herself, "luck seems to be coming
our way again!"
Five minutes later the rat appeared, bearing the trinket in its mouth.
It passed the beetle over to the cat, and then with a whisk was off for
ever. Its honour was safe, but it was afraid of Whitehead. It had seen
the gleam of desire in her green eyes, and the cat might have broken her
word if she had not been so anxious to get back home where her mistress
could command the wonderful kettle once more to bring forth food.
The two adventurers reached the river just as the sun was rising above
the eastern hills.
"Be careful," cautioned Blackfoot, as the cat leaped upon his back for
her ride across the stream, "be careful not to forget the treasure. In
short, remember that even though you are a female, it is necessary to
keep your mouth closed till we reach the other side."
"Thanks, but I don't think I need your advice," replied Whitehead,
picking up the beetle and leaping on to the dog's back.
But alas! just as they were nearing the farther shore, the excited cat
forgot her wisdom for a moment. A fish suddenly leaped out of the water
directly under her nose. It was too great a temptation. Snap! went her
jaws in a vain effort to land the scaly treasure, and the golden beetle
sank to the bottom of the river.
"There!" said the dog angrily, "what did I tell you? Now all our trouble
has been in vain--all on account of your stupidity."
For a time there was a bitter dispute, and the companions called each
other some very bad names--such as turtle and rabbit. Just as they were
starting away from the river, disappointed and discouraged, a friendly
frog who had by chance heard their conversation offered to fetch the
treasure from the bottom of the stream. No sooner said than done, and
after thanking this accommodating animal profusely, they turned homeward
once more.
When they reached the cottage the door was shut, and, bark as he would,
Blackfoot could not persuade his master to open it. There was the sound
of loud wailing inside.
"Mistress is broken-hearted," whispered the cat, "I will go to her and
make her happy."
So saying, she sprang lightly through a hole in the paper window, which,
alas! was too small and too far from the ground for the faithful dog to
enter.
A sad sight greeted the gaze of Whitehead. The son was lying on the bed
unconscious, almost dead for want of food, while his mother, in despair,
was rocking backwards and forwards wringing her wrinkled hands and
crying at the top of her voice for some one to come and save them.
"Here I am, mistress," cried Whitehead, "and here is the treasure you
are weeping for. I have rescued it and brought it back to you."
The widow, wild with joy at sight of the beetle, seized the cat in her
scrawny arms and hugged the pet tightly to her bosom.
"Breakfast, son, breakfast! Wake up from your swoon! Fortune has come
again. We are saved from starvation!"
Soon a steaming hot meal was ready, and you may well imagine how the old
woman and her son, heaping praises upon Whitehead, filled the beast's
platter with good things, but never a word did they say of the faithful
dog, who remained outside sniffing the fragrant odours and waiting in
sad wonder, for all this time the artful cat had said nothing of
Blackfoot's part in the rescue of the golden beetle.
At last, when breakfast was over, slipping away from the others,
Whitehead jumped out through the hole in the window.
"Oh, my dear Blackfoot," she began laughingly, "you should have been
inside to see what a feast they gave me! Mistress was so delighted at
my bringing back her treasure that she could not give me enough to eat,
nor say enough kind things about me. Too bad, old fellow, that you are
hungry. You'd better run out into the street and hunt up a bone."
Maddened by the shameful treachery of his companion, the enraged dog
sprang upon the cat and in a few seconds had shaken her to death.
"So dies the one who forgets a friend and who loses honour," he cried
sadly, as he stood over the body of his companion.
Rushing out into the street, he proclaimed the treachery of Whitehead
to the members of his tribe, at the same time advising that all
self-respecting dogs should from that time onwards make war upon the
feline race.
And that is why the descendants of old Blackfoot, whether in China or
in the great countries of the West, have waged continual war upon the
children and grandchildren of Whitehead, for a thousand generations of
dogs have fought them and hated them with a great and lasting hatred.
THE GREAT BELL
The mighty Yung-lo sat on the great throne surrounded by a hundred
attendants. He was sad, for he could think of no wonderful thing to do
for his country. He flirted his silken fan nervously and snapped his
long finger-nails in the impatience of despair.
"Woe is me!" he cried at last, his sorrow getting the better of his
usual calmness. "I have picked up the great capital and moved it from
the South to Peking and have built here a mighty city. I have surrounded
my city with a wall, even thicker and greater than the famous wall of
China. I have constructed in this city scores of temples and palaces.
I have had the wise men and scholars compile a great book of wisdom,
made up of 23,000 volumes, the largest and most wonderful collection
of learning ever gathered together by the hands of men. I have built
watch-towers, bridges, and giant monuments, and now, alas! as I approach
the end of my days as ruler of the Middle Kingdom there is nothing more
to be done for my people. Better far that I should even now close my
tired eyes for ever and mount up on high to be the guest of the dragon,
than live on in idleness, giving to my children an example of
uselessness and sloth."
"But, your Majesty," began one of Yung-lo's most faithful courtiers,
named Ming-lin, falling upon his knees and knocking his head three times
on the ground, "if you would only deign to listen to your humble slave,
I would dare to suggest a great gift for which the many people of
Peking, your children, would rise up and bless you both now and in
future generations."
"Only tell me of such a gift and I will not only grant it to the
imperial city, but as a sign of thanksgiving to you for your sage
counsel I will bestow upon you the royal peacock feather."
"It is not for one of my small virtues," replied the delighted official,
"to wear the feather when others so much wiser are denied it, but if it
please your Majesty, remember that in the northern district of the city
there has been erected a bell-tower which as yet remains empty. The
people of the city need a giant bell to sound out the fleeting hours of
the day, that they may be urged on to perform their labours and not be
idle. The water-clock already marks the hours, but there is no bell to
proclaim them to the populace."
"A good suggestion in sooth," answered the Emperor, smiling, "and yet
who is there among us that has skill enough in bell-craft to do the task
you propose? I am told that to cast a bell worthy of our imperial city
requires the genius of a poet and the skill of an astronomer."
"True, most mighty one, and yet permit me to say that Kwan-yu, who so
skilfully moulded the imperial cannon, can also cast a giant bell. He
alone of all your subjects is worthy of the task, for he alone can do
it justice."
Now, the official who proposed the name of Kwan-yu to the Emperor had
two objects in so doing. He wished to quiet the grief of Yung-lo, who
was mourning because he had nothing left to do for his people, and,
at the same time, to raise Kwan-yu to high rank, for Kwan-yu's only
daughter had for several years been betrothed to Ming-lin's only
son, and it would be a great stroke of luck for Ming-lin if his
daughter-in-law's father should come under direct favour of the Emperor.
"Depend upon it, Kwan-yu can do the work better than any other man
within the length and breadth of your empire," continued Ming-lin, again
bowing low three times.
"Then summon Kwan-yu at once to my presence, that I may confer with him
about this important business."
In great glee Ming-lin arose and backed himself away from the golden
throne, for it would have been very improper for him to turn his
coat-tails on the Son of Heaven.
But it was with no little fear that Kwan-yu undertook the casting of the
great bell.
"Can a carpenter make shoes?" he had protested, when Ming-lin had broken
the Emperor's message to him.
"Yes," replied the other quickly, "if they be like those worn by the
little island dwarfs, and, therefore, made of wood. Bells and cannon are
cast from similar material. You ought easily to adapt yourself to this
new work."
Now when Kwan-yu's daughter found out what he was about to undertake,
she was filled with a great fear.
"Oh, honoured father," she cried, "think well before you give this
promise. As a cannon-maker you are successful, but who can say about the
other task? And if you fail, the Great One's wrath will fall heavily
upon you."
"Just hear the girl," interrupted the ambitious mother. "What do you
know about success and failure? You'd better stick to the subject of
cooking and baby-clothes, for you will soon be married. As for your
father, pray let him attend to his own business. It is unseemly for
a girl to meddle in her father's affairs."
And so poor Ko-ai--for that was the maiden's name--was silenced, and
went back to her fancy-work with a big tear stealing down her fair
cheek, for she loved her father dearly and there had come into her heart
a strange terror at thought of his possible danger.
Meanwhile, Kwan-yu was summoned to the Forbidden City, which is in the
centre of Peking, and in which stands the Imperial palace. There he
received his instructions from the Son of Heaven.
"And remember," said Yung-lo in conclusion, "this bell must be so great
that the sound of it will ring out to a distance of thirty-three miles
on every hand. To this end, you should add in proper proportions gold
and brass, for they give depth and strength to everything with which
they mingle. Furthermore, in order that this giant may not be lacking in
the quality of sweetness, you must add silver in due proportion, while
the sayings of the sages must be graven on its sides."
Now when Kwan-yu had really received his commission from the
Emperor he searched the bookstalls of the city to find if possible
some ancient descriptions of the best methods used in bell-casting. Also
he offered generous wages to all who had ever had experience in the
great work for which he was preparing. Soon his great foundry was alive
with labourers; huge fires were burning; great piles of gold, silver and
other metals were lying here and there, ready to be weighed.
Whenever Kwan-yu went out to a public tea-house all of his friends plied
him with questions about the great bell.
"Will it be the largest in the world?"
"Oh, no," he would reply, "that is not necessary, but it must be the
sweetest-toned, for we Chinese strive not for size, but for purity; not
for greatness, but for virtue."
"When will it be finished?"
"Only the gods can tell, for I have had little experience, and perhaps I
shall fail to mix the metals properly."
Every few days the Son of Heaven himself would send an imperial
messenger to ask similar questions, for a king is likely to be just as
curious as his subjects, but Kwan-yu would always modestly reply that he
could not be certain; it was very doubtful when the bell would be ready.
At last, however, after consulting an astrologer, Kwan-yu appointed
a day for the casting, and then there came another courtier robed in
splendid garments, saying that at the proper hour the Great One himself
would for the first time cross Kwan-yu's threshold--would come to see
the casting of the bell he had ordered for his people. On hearing this,
Kwan-yu was sore afraid, for he felt that somehow, in spite of all his
reading, in spite of all the advice he had received from well-wishers,
there was something lacking in the mixture of the boiling metals that
would soon be poured into the giant mould. In short, Kwan-yu was about
to discover an important truth that this great world has been thousands
of years in learning--namely, that mere reading and advice cannot
produce skill, that true skill can come only from years of experience
and practice. On the brink of despair, he sent a servant with money to
the temple, to pray to the gods for success in his venture. Truly,
despair and prayer rhyme in every language.
Ko-ai, his daughter, was also afraid when she saw the cloud on her
father's brow, for she it was, you remember, who had tried to prevent
him from undertaking the Emperor's commission. She also went to the
temple, in company with a faithful old servant, and prayed to heaven.
The great day dawned. The Emperor and his courtiers were assembled, the
former sitting on a platform built for the occasion. Three attendants
waved beautiful hand-painted fans about his imperial brow, for the room
was very warm, and a huge block of ice lay melting in a bowl of carved
brass, cooling the hot air before it should blow upon the head of the
Son of Heaven.
Kwan-yu's wife and daughter stood in a corner at the back of the room,
peering anxiously towards the cauldron of molten liquid, for well they
knew that Kwan-yu's future rank and power depended on the success of
this enterprise. Around the walls stood Kwan-yu's friends, and at the
windows groups of excited servants strained their necks, trying to catch
a glimpse of royalty, and for once afraid to chatter. Kwan-yu himself
was hurrying hither and thither, now giving a final order, now gazing
anxiously at the empty mould, and again glancing towards the throne to
see if his imperial master was showing signs of impatience.
At last all was ready; everyone was waiting breathlessly for the sign
from Yung-lo which should start the flowing of the metal. A slight bow
of the head, a lifting of the finger! The glowing liquid, hissing with
delight at being freed even for a moment from its prison, ran forward
faster and faster along the channel that led into the great earthen bed.
The bell-maker covered his eyes with his fan, afraid to look at the
swiftly-flowing stream. Were all his hopes to be suddenly dashed by the
failure of the metals to mix and harden properly? A heavy sigh escaped
him as at last he looked up at the thing he had created. Something had
indeed gone wrong; he knew in the flash of an eye that misfortune had
overtaken him.
Yes! sure enough, when at last the earthen casting had been broken, even
the smallest child could see that the giant bell, instead of being a
thing of beauty was a sorry mass of metals that would not blend.
"Alas!" said Yung-lo, "here is indeed a mighty failure, but even in this
disappointment I see an object lesson well worthy of consideration, for
behold! in yonder elements are all the materials of which this country
is made up. There are gold and silver and the baser metals. United in
the proper manner they would make a bell so wonderfully beautiful and so
pure of tone that the very spirits of the Western heavens would pause to
look and listen. But divided they form a thing that is hideous to eye
and ear. Oh, my China! how many wars are there from time to time among
the different sections, weakening the country and making it poor! If
only all these peoples, great and small, the gold and silver and the
baser elements, would unite, then would this land be really worthy of
the name of the Middle Kingdom!"
The courtiers all applauded this speech of the great Yung-lo, but
Kwan-yu remained on the ground where he had thrown himself at the feet
of his sovereign. Still bowing his head and moaning, he cried out:
"Ah! your Majesty! I urged you not to appoint me, and now indeed you see
my unfitness. Take my life, I beg you, as a punishment for my failure."
"Rise, Kwan-yu," said the great Prince. "I would be a mean master indeed
if I did not grant you another trial. Rise up and see that your next
casting profits by the lesson of this failure."
So Kwan-yu arose, for when the King speaks, all men must listen. The
next day he began his task once more, but still his heart was heavy,
for he knew not the reason of his failure and was therefore unable to
correct his error. For many months he laboured night and day. Hardly a
word would he speak to his wife, and when his daughter tried to tempt
him with a dish of sunflower seed that she had parched herself, he would
reward her with a sad smile, but would by no means laugh with her and
joke as had formerly been his custom. On the first and fifteenth day of
every moon he went himself to the temple and implored the gods to grant
him their friendly assistance, while Ko-ai added her prayers to his,
burning incense and weeping before the grinning idols.
Again the great Yung-lo was seated on the platform in Kwan-yu's foundry,
and again his courtiers hovered round him, but this time, as it was
winter, they did not flirt the silken fans. The Great One was certain
that this casting would be successful. He had been lenient with Kwan-yu
on the first occasion, and now at last he and the great city were to
profit by that mercy.
Again he gave the signal; once more every neck was craned to see the
flowing of the metal. But, alas! when the casing was removed it was seen
that the new bell was no better than the first. It was, in fact, a
dreadful failure, cracked and ugly, for the gold and silver and the
baser elements had again refused to blend into a united whole.
With a bitter cry which touched the hearts of all those present, the
unhappy Kwan-yu fell upon the floor. This time he did not bow before his
master, for at the sight of the miserable conglomeration of useless
metals his courage failed him, and he fainted. When at last he came to,
the first sight that met his eyes was the scowling face of Yung-lo. Then
he heard, as in a dream, the stern voice of the Son of Heaven:
"Unhappy Kwan-yu, can it be that you, upon whom I have ever heaped my
favours, have twice betrayed the trust? The first time, I was sorry
for you and willing to forget, but now that sorrow has turned into
anger--yea, the anger of heaven itself is upon you. Now, I bid you mark
well my words. A third chance you shall have to cast the bell, but if on
that third attempt you fail--then by order of the Vermilion Pencil both
you and Ming-lin, who recommended you, shall pay the penalty."
For a long time after the Emperor had departed, Kwan-yu lay on the floor
surrounded by his attendants, but chief of all those who tried to
restore him was his faithful daughter. For a whole week he wavered
between life and death, and then at last there came a turn in his
favour. Once more he regained his health, once more he began his
preparations.
Yet all the time he was about his work his heart was heavy, for he felt
that he would soon journey into the dark forest, the region of the great
yellow spring, the place from which no pilgrim ever returns. Ko-ai, too,
felt more than ever that her father was in the presence of a great
danger.
"Surely," she said one day to her mother, "a raven must have flown over
his head. He is like the proverb of the blind man on the blind horse
coming at midnight to a deep ditch. Oh, how can he cross over?"
Willingly would this dutiful daughter have done anything to save her
loved one. Night and day she racked her brains for some plan, but all to
no avail.
On the day before the third casting, as Ko-ai was sitting in front of
her brass mirror braiding her long black hair, suddenly a little bird
flew in at the window and perched upon her head. Immediately the
startled maiden seemed to hear a voice as if some good fairy were
whispering in her ear:
"Do not hesitate. You must go and consult the famous juggler who even
now is visiting the city. Sell your jade-stones and other jewels, for
this man of wisdom will not listen unless his attention is attracted
by huge sums of money."
The feathered messenger flew out of her room, but Ko-ai had heard enough
to make her happy. She despatched a trusted servant to sell her jade and
her jewels, charging him on no account to tell her mother. Then, with a
great sum of money in her possession she sought out the magician who was
said to be wiser than the sages in knowledge of life and death.
"Tell me," she implored, as the greybeard summoned her to his presence,
"tell me how I can save my father, for the Emperor has ordered his death
if he fails a third time in the casting of the bell."
The astrologer, after plying her with questions, put on his
tortoise-shell glasses and searched long in his book of knowledge. He
also examined closely the signs of the heavens, consulting the mystic
tables over and over again. Finally, he turned toward Ko-ai, who all the
time had been awaiting his answer with impatience.
"Nothing could be plainer than the reason of your father's failure, for
when a man seeks to do the impossible, he can expect Fate to give him no
other answer. Gold cannot unite with silver, nor brass with iron, unless
the blood of a maiden is mingled with the molten metals, but the girl
who gives up her life to bring about the fusion must be pure and good."
With a sigh of despair Ko-ai heard the astrologer's answer. She loved
the world and all its beauties; she loved her birds, her companions, her
father; she had expected to marry soon, and then there would have been
children to love and cherish. But now all these dreams of happiness must
be forgotten. There was no other maiden to give up her life for Kwan-yu.
She, Ko-ai, loved her father and must make the sacrifice for his sake.
And so the day arrived for the third trial, and a third time Yung-lo
took his place in Kwan-yu's factory, surrounded by his courtiers. There
was a look of stern expectancy on his face. Twice he had excused his
underling for failure. Now there could be no thought of mercy. If the
bell did not come from its cast perfect in tone and fair to look upon,
Kwan-yu must be punished with the severest punishment that could be
meted out to man--even death itself. That was why there was a look of
stern expectancy on Yung-lo's face, for he really loved Kwan-yu and did
not wish to send him to his death.
As for Kwan-yu himself, he had long ago given up all thought of success,
for nothing had happened since his second failure to make him any surer
this time of success. He had settled up his business affairs, arranging
for a goodly sum to go to his beloved daughter; he had bought the coffin
in which his own body would be laid away and had stored it in one of the
principal rooms of his dwelling; he had even engaged the priests and
musicians who should chant his funeral dirge, and, last but not least,
he had arranged with the man who would have charge of chopping off his
head, that one fold of skin should be left uncut, as this would bring
him better luck on his entry into the spiritual world than if the head
were severed entirely from the body.
And so we may say that Kwan-yu was prepared to die. In fact, on the
night before the final casting he had a dream in which he saw himself
kneeling before the headsman and cautioning him not to forget the
binding agreement the latter had entered into.
Of all those present in the great foundry, perhaps the devoted Ko-ai was
the least excited. Unnoticed, she had slipped along the wall from the
spot where she had been standing with her mother and had planted herself
directly opposite the huge tank in which the molten, seething liquid
bubbled, awaiting the signal when it should be set free. Ko-ai gazed at
the Emperor, watching intently for the well-known signal. When at last
she saw his head move forward she sprang with a wild leap into the
boiling liquid, at the same time crying in her clear, sweet voice:
"For thee, dear father! It is the only way!"
The molten white metal received the lovely girl into its ardent embrace,
received her, and swallowed her up completely, as in a tomb of liquid
fire.
And Kwan-yu--what of Kwan-yu, the frantic father? Mad with grief at the
sight of his loved one giving up her life, a sacrifice to save him, he
had sprung forward to hold her back from her terrible death, but had
succeeded only in catching one of her tiny jewelled slippers as she sank
out of sight for ever--a dainty, silken slipper, to remind him always of
her wonderful sacrifice. In his wild grief as he clasped this pitiful
little memento to his heart he would himself have leaped in and followed
her to her death, if his servants had not restrained him until the
Emperor had repeated his signal and the liquid had been poured into the
cast. As the sad eyes of all those present peered into the molten river
of metals rushing to its earthen bed, they saw not a single sign
remaining of the departed Ko-ai.
This, then, my children, is the time-worn legend of the great bell
of Peking, a tale that has been repeated a million times by poets,
story-tellers and devoted mothers, for you must know that on this third
casting, when the earthen mould was removed, there stood revealed the
most beautiful bell that eye had ever looked upon, and when it was swung
up into the bell-tower there was immense rejoicing among the people. The
silver and the gold and the iron and the brass, held together by the
blood of the virgin, had blended perfectly, and the clear voice of the
monster bell rang out over the great city, sounding a deeper, richer
melody than that of any other bell within the limits of the Middle
Kingdom, or, for that matter, of all the world. And, strange to say,
even yet the deep-voiced colossus seems to cry out the name of the
maiden who gave herself a living sacrifice, "Ko-ai! Ko-ai! Ko-ai!" so
that all the people may remember her deed of virtue ten thousand years
ago. And between the mellow peals of music there often seems to come a
plaintive whisper that may be heard only by those standing near, "Hsieh!
hsieh"--the Chinese word for slipper. "Alas!" say all who hear it,
"Ko-ai is crying for her slipper. Poor little Ko-ai!"
And now, my dear children, this tale is almost finished, but there is
still one thing you must by no means fail to remember. By order of the
Emperor, the face of the great bell was graven with precious sayings
from the classics, that even in its moments of silence the bell might
teach lessons of virtue to the people.
"Behold," said Yung-lo, as he stood beside the grief-stricken father,
"amongst all yonder texts of wisdom, the priceless sayings of our
honoured sages, there is none that can teach to my children so sweet a
lesson of filial love and devotion as that one last act of your devoted
daughter. For though she died to save you, her deed will still be sung
and extolled by my people when you are passed away, yea, even when the
bell itself has crumbled into ruins."
THE STRANGE TALE OF DOCTOR DOG
Far up in the mountains of the Province of Hunan in the central part of
China, there once lived in a small village a rich gentleman who had only
one child. This girl, like the daughter of Kwan-yu in the story of the
Great Bell, was the very joy of her father's life.
Now Mr. Min, for that was this gentleman's name, was famous throughout
the whole district for his learning, and, as he was also the owner of
much property, he spared no effort to teach Honeysuckle the wisdom of
the sages, and to give her everything she craved. Of course this was
enough to spoil most children, but Honeysuckle was not at all like other
children. As sweet as the flower from which she took her name, she
listened to her father's slightest command, and obeyed without ever
waiting to be told a second time.
Her father often bought kites for her, of every kind and shape. There
were fish, birds, butterflies, lizards and huge dragons, one of which
had a tail more than thirty feet long. Mr. Min was very skilful in
flying these kites for little Honeysuckle, and so naturally did his
birds and butterflies circle round and hover about in the air that
almost any little western boy would have been deceived and said, "Why,
there is a real bird, and not a kite at all!" Then again, he would
fasten a queer little instrument to the string, which made a kind of
humming noise, as he waved his hand from side to side. "It is the wind
singing, Daddy," cried Honeysuckle, clapping her hands with joy;
"singing a kite-song to both of us." Sometimes, to teach his little
darling a lesson if she had been the least naughty, Mr. Min would fasten
queerly twisted scraps of paper, on which were written many Chinese
words, to the string of her favourite kite.
"What are you doing, Daddy?" Honeysuckle would ask. "What can those
queer-looking papers be?"
"On every piece is written a sin that we have done."
"What is a sin, Daddy?"
"Oh, when Honeysuckle has been naughty; that is a sin!" he answered
gently. "Your old nurse is afraid to scold you, and if you are to grow
up to be a good woman, Daddy must teach you what is right."
Then Mr. Min would send the kite up high--high over the house-tops,
even higher than the tall Pagoda on the hillside. When all his cord
was let out, he would pick up two sharp stones, and, handing them to
Honeysuckle, would say, "Now, daughter, cut the string, and the wind
will carry away the sins that are written down on the scraps of paper."
"But, Daddy, the kite is so pretty. Mayn't we keep our sins a little
longer?" she would innocently ask.
"No, child; it is dangerous to hold on to one's sins. Virtue is the
foundation of happiness," he would reply sternly, choking back his
laughter at her question. "Make haste and cut the cord."
So Honeysuckle, always obedient--at least with her father--would saw
the string in two between the sharp stones, and with a childish cry of
despair would watch her favourite kite, blown by the wind, sail farther
and farther away, until at last, straining her eyes, she could see it
sink slowly to the earth in some far-distant meadow.
"Now laugh and be happy," Mr. Min would say, "for your sins are all
gone. See that you don't get a new supply of them."
Honeysuckle was also fond of seeing the Punch and Judy show, for,
you must know, this old-fashioned amusement for children was enjoyed
by little folks in China, perhaps three thousand years before your
great-grandfather was born. It is even said that the great Emperor, Mu,
when he saw these little dancing images for the first time, was greatly
enraged at seeing one of them making eyes at his favourite wife. He
ordered the showman to be put to death, and it was with difficulty the
poor fellow persuaded his Majesty that the dancing puppets were not
really alive at all, but only images of cloth and clay.
No wonder then Honeysuckle liked to see Punch and Judy if the Son of
Heaven himself had been deceived by their queer antics into thinking
them real people of flesh and blood.
But we must hurry on with our story, or some of our readers will be
asking, "But where is Dr. Dog? Are you never coming to the hero of this
tale?" One day when Honeysuckle was sitting inside a shady pavilion that
overlooked a tiny fish-pond, she was suddenly seized with a violent
attack of colic. Frantic with pain, she told a servant to summon her
father, and then without further ado, she fell over in a faint upon the
When Mr. Min reached his daughter's side, she was still unconscious.
After sending for the family physician to come post haste, he got his
daughter to bed, but although she recovered from her fainting fit, the
extreme pain continued until the poor girl was almost dead from
exhaustion.
Now, when the learned doctor arrived and peered at her from under his
gigantic spectacles, he could not discover the cause of her trouble.
However, like some of our western medical men, he did not confess his
ignorance, but proceeded to prescribe a huge dose of boiling water, to
be followed a little later by a compound of pulverized deer's horn and
dried toadskin.
Poor Honeysuckle lay in agony for three days, all the time growing
weaker and weaker from loss of sleep. Every great doctor in the district
had been summoned for consultation; two had come from Changsha, the
chief city of the province, but all to no avail. It was one of those
cases that seem to be beyond the power of even the most learned
physicians. In the hope of receiving the great reward offered by the
desperate father, these wise men searched from cover to cover in the
great Chinese Cyclopedia of Medicine, trying in vain to find a method of
treating the unhappy maiden. There was even thought of calling in a
certain foreign physician from England, who was in a distant city, and
was supposed, on account of some marvellous cures he had brought to
pass, to be in direct league with the devil. However, the city
magistrate would not allow Mr. Min to call in this outsider, for fear
trouble might be stirred up among the people.
Mr. Min sent out a proclamation in every direction, describing his
daughter's illness, and offering to bestow on her a handsome dowry and
give her in marriage to whoever should be the means of bringing her back
to health and happiness. He then sat at her bedside and waited, feeling
that he had done all that was in his power. There were many answers to
his invitation. Physicians, old and young, came from every part of the
Empire to try their skill, and when they had seen poor Honeysuckle and
also the huge pile of silver shoes her father offered as a wedding gift,
they all fought with might and main for her life; some having been
attracted by her great beauty and excellent reputation, others by the
tremendous reward.
But, alas for poor Honeysuckle! Not one of all those wise men could cure
her! One day, when she was feeling a slight change for the better, she
called her father, and, clasping his hand with her tiny one said, "Were
it not for your love I would give up this hard fight and pass over into
the dark wood; or, as my old grandmother says, fly up into the Western
Heavens. For your sake, because I am your only child, and especially
because you have no son, I have struggled hard to live, but now I feel
that the next attack of that dreadful pain will carry me away. And oh,
I do not want to die!"
Here Honeysuckle wept as if her heart would break, and her old father
wept too, for the more she suffered the more he loved her.
Just then her face began to turn pale. "It is coming! The pain is
coming, father! Very soon I shall be no more. Good-bye, father!
Good-bye; good----." Here her voice broke and a great sob almost broke
her father's heart. He turned away from her bedside; he could not bear
to see her suffer. He walked outside and sat down on a rustic bench; his
head fell upon his bosom, and the great salt tears trickled down his
long grey beard.
As Mr. Min sat thus overcome with grief, he was startled at hearing a
low whine. Looking up he saw, to his astonishment, a shaggy mountain dog
about the size of a Newfoundland. The huge beast looked into the old
man's eyes with so intelligent and human an expression, with such a sad
and wistful gaze, that the greybeard addressed him, saying, "Why have
you come? To cure my daughter?"
The dog replied with three short barks, wagging his tail vigorously and
turning toward the half-opened door that led into the room where the
girl lay.
By this time, willing to try any chance whatever of reviving his
daughter, Mr. Min bade the animal follow him into Honeysuckle's
apartment. Placing his forepaws upon the side of her bed, the dog looked
long and steadily at the wasted form before him and held his ear
intently for a moment over the maiden's heart. Then, with a slight cough
he deposited from his mouth into her outstretched hand, a tiny stone.
Touching her wrist with his right paw, he motioned to her to swallow the
stone.
"Yes, my dear, obey him," counselled her father, as she turned to him
inquiringly, "for good Dr. Dog has been sent to your bedside by the
mountain fairies, who have heard of your illness and who wish to invite
you back to life again."
Without further delay the sick girl, who was by this time almost burned
away by the fever, raised her hand to her lips and swallowed the tiny
charm. Wonder of wonders! No sooner had it passed her lips than a
miracle occurred. The red flush passed away from her face, the pulse
resumed its normal beat, the pains departed from her body, and she arose
from the bed well and smiling.
Flinging her arms about her father's neck, she cried out in joy, "Oh,
I am well again; well and happy; thanks to the medicine of the good
physician."
The noble dog barked three times, wild with delight at hearing these
tearful words of gratitude, bowed low, and put his nose in Honeysuckle's
outstretched hand.
Mr. Min, greatly moved by his daughter's magical recovery, turned to the
strange physician, saying, "Noble Sir, were it not for the form you have
taken, for some unknown reason, I would willingly give four times the
sum in silver that I promised for the cure of the girl, into your
possession. As it is, I suppose you have no use for silver, but remember
that so long as we live, whatever we have is yours for the asking, and
I beg of you to prolong your visit, to make this the home of your old
age--in short, remain here for ever as my guest--nay, as a member of
my family."
The dog barked thrice, as if in assent. From that day he was treated as
an equal by father and daughter. The many servants were commanded to
obey his slightest whim, to serve him with the most expensive food on
the market, to spare no expense in making him the happiest and best-fed
dog in all the world. Day after day he ran at Honeysuckle's side as she
gathered flowers in her garden, lay down before her door when she was
resting, guarded her Sedan chair when she was carried by servants into
the city. In short, they were constant companions; a stranger would have
thought they had been friends from childhood.
One day, however, just as they were returning from a journey outside her
father's compound, at the very instant when Honeysuckle was alighting
from her chair, without a moment's warning, the huge animal dashed past
the attendants, seized his beautiful mistress in his mouth, and before
anyone could stop him, bore her off to the mountains. By the time the
alarm was sounded, darkness had fallen over the valley and as the night
was cloudy no trace could be found of the dog and his fair burden.
Once more the frantic father left no stone unturned to save his
daughter. Huge rewards were offered, bands of woodmen scoured the
mountains high and low, but, alas, no sign of the girl could be found!
The unfortunate father gave up the search and began to prepare himself
for the grave. There was nothing now left in life that he cared
for--nothing but thoughts of his departed daughter. Honeysuckle was gone
for ever.
"Alas!" said he, quoting the lines of a famous poet who had fallen into
despair:
  "My whiting hair would make an endless rope,
  Yet would not measure all my depth of woe."
Several long years passed by; years of sorrow for the ageing man, pining
for his departed daughter. One beautiful October day he was sitting in
the very same pavilion where he had so often sat with his darling. His
head was bowed forward on his breast, his forehead was lined with grief.
A rustling of leaves attracted his attention. He looked up. Standing
directly in front of him was Dr. Dog, and lo, riding on his back,
clinging to the animal's shaggy hair, was Honeysuckle, his long-lost
daughter; while standing near by were three of the handsomest boys he
had ever set eyes upon!
"Ah, my daughter! My darling daughter, where have you been all these
years?" cried the delighted father, pressing the girl to his aching
breast. "Have you suffered many a cruel pain since you were snatched
away so suddenly? Has your life been filled with sorrow?"
"Only at the thought of your grief," she replied, tenderly, stroking
his forehead with her slender fingers; "only at the thought of your
suffering; only at the thought of how I should like to see you every day
and tell you that my husband was kind and good to me. For you must know,
dear father, this is no mere animal that stands beside you. This Dr.
Dog, who cured me and claimed me as his bride because of your promise,
is a great magician. He can change himself at will into a thousand
shapes. He chooses to come here in the form of a mountain beast so that
no one may penetrate the secret of his distant palace."
"Then he is your husband?" faltered the old man, gazing at the animal
with a new expression on his wrinkled face.
"Yes; my kind and noble husband, the father of my three sons, your
grandchildren, whom we have brought to pay you a visit."
"And where do you live?"
"In a wonderful cave in the heart of the great mountains; a beautiful
cave whose walls and floors are covered with crystals, and encrusted
with sparkling gems. The chairs and tables are set with jewels; the
rooms are lighted by a thousand glittering diamonds. Oh, it is lovelier
than the palace of the Son of Heaven himself! We feed of the flesh of
wild deer and mountain goats, and fish from the clearest mountain
stream. We drink cold water out of golden goblets, without first boiling
it, for it is purity itself. We breathe fragrant air that blows through
forests of pine and hemlock. We live only to love each other and our
children, and oh, we are so happy! And you, father, you must come back
with us to the great mountains and live there with us the rest of your
days, which, the gods grant, may be very many."
[Illustration: "CLINGING TO THE ANIMAL'S SHAGGY HAIR WAS HONEYSUCKLE"]
The old man pressed his daughter once more to his breast and fondled the
children, who clambered over him rejoicing at the discovery of a
grandfather they had never seen before.
From Dr. Dog and his fair Honeysuckle are sprung, it is said, the
well-known race of people called the Yus, who even now inhabit the
mountainous regions of the Canton and Hunan provinces. It is not for
this reason, however, that we have told the story here, but because we
felt sure every reader would like to learn the secret of the dog that
cured a sick girl and won her for his bride.
HOW FOOTBINDING STARTED
In the very beginning of all things, when the gods were creating the
world, at last the time came to separate the earth from the heavens.
This was hard work, and if it had not been for the coolness and skill of
a young goddess all would have failed. This goddess was named Lu-o. She
had been idly watching the growth of the planet, when, to her horror,
she saw the newly made ball slipping slowly from its place. In another
second it would have shot down into the bottomless pit. Quick as a flash
Lu-o stopped it with her magic wand and held it firmly until the chief
god came dashing up to the rescue.
But this was not all. When men and women were put on the earth Lu-o
helped them greatly by setting an example of purity and kindness. Every
one loved her and pointed her out as the one who was always willing to
do a good deed. After she had left the world and gone into the land of
the gods, beautiful statues of her were set up in many temples to keep
her image always before the eyes of sinful people. The greatest of these
was in the capital city. Thus, when sorrowful women wished to offer up
their prayers to some virtuous goddess they would go to a temple of Lu-o
and pour out their hearts before her shrine.
At one time the wicked Chow-sin, last ruler of the Yins, went to pray in
the city Temple. There his royal eyes were captivated by the sight of a
wonderful face, the beauty of which was so great that he fell in love
with it at once, telling his ministers that he wished he might take this
goddess, who was no other than Lu-o, for one of his wives.
Now Lu-o was terribly angry that an earthly prince should dare to make
such a remark about her. Then and there she determined to punish the
Emperor. Calling her assistant spirits, she told them of Chow-sin's
insult. Of all her servants the most cunning was one whom we shall call
Fox Sprite, because he really belonged to the fox family. Lu-o ordered
Fox Sprite to spare himself no trouble in making the wicked ruler suffer
for his impudence.
For many days, try as he would, Chow-sin, the great Son of Heaven, could
not forget the face he had seen in the temple.
"He is stark mad," laughed his courtiers behind his back, "to fall in
love with a statue."
"I must find a woman just like her," said the Emperor, "and take her to
wife."
"Why not, most Mighty One," suggested a favourite adviser, "send forth a
command throughout the length and breadth of your Empire, that no maiden
shall be taken in marriage until you have chosen yourself a wife whose
beauty shall equal that of Lu-o?"
Chow-sin was pleased with this suggestion and doubtless would have
followed it had not his Prime Minister begged him to postpone issuing
the order. "Your Imperial Highness," began the official, "since you have
been pleased once or twice to follow my counsel, I beg of you to give
ear now to what I say."
"Speak, and your words shall have my best attention," replied Chow-sin,
with a gracious wave of the hand.
"Know then, Great One, that in the southern part of your realm there
dwells a viceroy whose bravery has made him famous in battle."
"Are you speaking of Su-nan?" questioned Chow-sin, frowning, for this
Su-nan had once been a rebel.
"None other, mighty Son of Heaven. Famous is he as a soldier, but his
name is now even greater in that he is the father of the most beautiful
girl in all China. This lovely flower that has bloomed of late within
his household is still unmarried. Why not order her father to bring her
to the palace that you may wed her and place her in your royal
dwelling?"
"And are you sure of this wondrous beauty you describe so prettily?"
asked the ruler, a smile of pleasure lighting up his face.
"So sure that I will stake my head on your being satisfied."
"Enough! I command you at once to summon the viceroy and his daughter.
Add the imperial seal to the message."
The Prime Minister smilingly departed to give the order. In his heart he
was more than delighted that the Emperor had accepted his suggestion,
for Su-nan, the viceroy, had long been his chief enemy, and he planned
in this way to overthrow him. The viceroy, as he knew, was a man of
iron. He would certainly not feel honoured at the thought of having his
daughter enter the Imperial Palace as a secondary wife. Doubtless he
would refuse to obey the order and would thus bring about his own
immediate downfall.
Nor was the Prime Minister mistaken. When Su-nan received the imperial
message his heart was hot with anger against his sovereign. To be robbed
of his lovely Ta-ki, even by the throne, was, in his eyes, a terrible
disgrace. Could he have been sure that she would be made Empress it
might have been different, but with so many others sharing Chow-sin's
favour, her promotion to first place in the Great One's household was by
no means certain. Besides, she was Su-nan's favourite child, and the old
man could not bear the thought of separation from her. Rather would he
give up his life than let her go to this cruel ruler.
"No, you shall not do it," said he to Ta-ki, "not though I must die to
save you."
The beautiful girl listened to her father's words, in tears. Throwing
herself at his feet she thanked him for his mercy and promised to love
him more fondly than ever. She told him that her vanity had not been
flattered by what most girls might have thought an honour, that she
would rather have the love of one good man like her father, than share
with others the affections of a king.
After listening to his daughter, the viceroy sent a respectful answer to
the palace, thanking the Emperor for his favour, but saying he could not
give up Ta-ki. "She is unworthy of the honour you purpose doing her," he
said, in conclusion, "for, having been the apple of her father's eye,
she would not be happy to share even your most august favour with the
many others you have chosen."
[Illustration: "THROWING HERSELF AT HIS FEET SHE THANKED HIM FOR HIS
MERCY."]
When the Emperor learned of Su-nan's reply he could hardly believe his
ears. To have his command thus disobeyed was an unheard-of crime. Never
before had a subject of the Middle Kingdom offered such an insult to a
ruler. Boiling with rage, he ordered his prime minister to send forth
an army that would bring the viceroy to his senses. "Tell him if he
disobeys that he and his family, together with all they possess, shall
be destroyed."
Delighted at the success of his plot against Su-nan, the Prime Minister
sent a regiment of soldiers to bring the rebel to terms. In the meantime
the friends of the daring viceroy had not been idle. Hearing of the
danger threatening their ruler, who had become a general favourite,
hundreds of men offered him their aid against the army of Chow-sin. Thus
when the Emperor's banners were seen approaching and the war drums were
heard rolling in the distance, the rebels, with a great shout, dashed
forth to do battle for their leader. In the fight that took place the
Imperial soldiers were forced to run.
When the Emperor heard of this defeat he was hot with anger. He called
together his advisers and commanded that an army, double the size of the
first one, should be sent to Su-nan's country to destroy the fields and
villages of the people who had risen up against him. "Spare not one of
them," he shouted, "for they are traitors to the Dragon Throne."
Once more the viceroy's friends resolved to support him, even to the
death. Ta-ki, his daughter, went apart from the other members of the
family, weeping most bitterly that she had brought such sorrow upon
them. "Rather would I go into the palace and be the lowest among
Chow-sin's women than to be the cause of all this grief," she cried,
in desperation.
But her father soothed her, saying, "Be of good cheer, Ta-ki. The
Emperor's army, though it be twice as large as mine, shall not overcome
us. Right is on our side. The gods of battle will help those who fight
for justice."
One week later a second battle was fought, and the struggle was so close
that none could foresee the result. The Imperial army was commanded by
the oldest nobles in the kingdom, those most skilled in warfare, while
the viceroy's men were young and poorly drilled. Moreover, the members
of the Dragon Army had been promised double pay if they should
accomplish the wishes of their sovereign, while Su-nan's soldiers knew
only too well that they would be put to the sword if they should be
defeated.
Just as the clash of arms was at its highest, the sound of gongs was
heard upon a distant hill. The government troops were amazed at seeing
fresh companies marching to the rescue of their foe. With a wild cry of
disappointment they turned and fled from the field. These unexpected
reinforcements turned out to be women whom Ta-ki had persuaded to dress
up as soldiers and go with her for the purpose of frightening the enemy.
Thus for a second time was Su-nan victorious.
During the following year several battles occurred that counted for
little, except that in each of them many of Su-nan's followers were
killed. At last one of the viceroy's best friends came to him, saying,
"Noble lord, it is useless to continue the struggle. I fear you must
give up the fight. You have lost more than half your supporters; the
remaining bowmen are either sick or wounded and can be of little use.
The Emperor, moreover, is even now raising a new army from the distant
provinces, and will soon send against us a force ten times as great as
any we have yet seen. There being no hope of victory, further fighting
would be folly. Lead, therefore, your daughter to the palace. Throw
yourself upon the mercy of the throne. You must accept cheerfully the
fate the gods have suffered you to bear."
Ta-ki, chancing to overhear this conversation, rushed in and begged her
father to hold out no longer, but to deliver her up to the greed of the
wicked Chow-sin.
With a sigh, the viceroy yielded to their wishes. The next day he
despatched a messenger to the Emperor, promising to bring Ta-ki at once
Now we must not forget Fox Sprite, the demon, who had been commanded by
the good goddess Lu-o to bring a dreadful punishment upon the Emperor.
Through all the years of strife between Chow-sin and the rebels, Fox
Sprite had been waiting patiently for his chance. He knew well that some
day, sooner or later, there would come an hour when Chow-sin would be at
his mercy. When the time came, therefore, for Ta-ki to go to the palace,
Fox Sprite felt that at last his chance had come. The beautiful maiden
for whom Chow-sin had given up so many hundreds of his soldiers, would
clearly have great power over the Emperor. She must be made to help
in the punishment of her wicked husband. So Fox Sprite made himself
invisible and travelled with the viceroy's party as it went from central
China to the capital.
On the last night of their journey Su-nan and his daughter stopped for
rest and food at a large inn. No sooner had the girl gone to her room
for the night than Fox Sprite followed her. Then he made himself
visible. At first she was frightened to see so strange a being in her
room, but when Fox Sprite told her he was a servant of the great
goddess, Lu-o, she was comforted, for she knew that Lu-o was the friend
of women and children.
"But how can I help to punish the Emperor?" she faltered, when the
sprite told her he wanted her assistance. "I am but a helpless girl,"
and here she began to cry.
"Dry your tears," he said soothingly. "It will be very easy. Only let me
take your form for a little. When I am the Emperor's wife," laughing, "I
shall find a way to punish him, for no one can give a man more pain that
his wife can, if she desires to do so. You know, I am a servant of Lu-o
and can do anything I wish."
"But the Emperor won't have a fox for a wife," she sobbed.
"Though I am still a fox I shall look like the beautiful Ta-ki. Make
your heart easy. He will never know."
"Oh, I see," she smiled, "you will put your spirit into my body and you
will look just like me, though you really won't be me. But what will
become of the real me? Shall I have to be a fox and look like you?"
"No, not unless you want to. I will make you invisible, and you can be
ready to go back into your own body when I have got rid of the Emperor."
"Very well," replied the girl, somewhat relieved by his explanation,
"but try not to be too long about it, because I don't like the idea of
somebody else walking about in my body."
So Fox Sprite caused his own spirit to enter the girl's body, and no
one could have told by her outward appearance that any change had taken
place. The beautiful girl was now in reality the sly Fox Sprite, but in
one way only did she look like a fox. When the fox-spirit entered her
body, her feet suddenly shrivelled up and became very similar in shape
and size to the feet of the animal who had her in his power. When the
fox noticed this, at first he was somewhat annoyed, but, feeling that no
one else would know, he did not take the trouble to change the fox feet
back to human form.
On the following morning, when the viceroy called his daughter for the
last stage of their journey, he greeted Fox Sprite without suspecting
that anything unusual had happened since he had last seen Ta-ki. So well
did this crafty spirit perform his part that the father was completely
deceived, by look, by voice, and by gesture.
The next day the travellers arrived at the capital and Su-nan presented
himself before Chow-sin, the Emperor, leading Fox Sprite with him. Of
course the crafty fox with all his magic powers was soon able to gain
the mastery over the wicked ruler. The Great One pardoned Su-nan,
although he had fully intended to put him to death as a rebel.
Now the chance for which Fox Sprite had been waiting had come. He began
at once, causing the Emperor to do many deeds of violence. The people
had already begun to dislike Chow-sin, and soon he became hateful in
their sight. Many of the leading members of the court were put to death
unjustly. Horrible tortures were devised for punishing those who did not
find favour with the crown. At last there was open talk of a rebellion.
Of course, all these things delighted the wily fox, for he saw that,
sooner or later, the Son of Heaven would be turned out of the palace,
and he knew that then his work for the goddess Lu-o would be finished.
Besides worming his way into the heart of the Emperor, the fox became
a general favourite with the ladies of the palace. These women saw in
Chow-sin's latest wife the most beautiful woman who had ever lived in
the royal harem. One would think that this beauty might have caused
them to hate Fox Sprite, but such was not the case. They admired the
plumpness of Fox Sprite's body, the fairness of Fox Sprite's complexion,
the fire in Fox Sprite's eyes, but most of all they wondered at the
smallness of Fox Sprite's feet, for, you remember, the supposed Ta-ki
now had fox's feet instead of those of human shape.
Thus small feet became the fashion among women. All the court ladies,
old and young, beautiful and ugly, began thinking of plans for making
their own feet as tiny as those of Fox Sprite. In this way they thought
to increase their chances of finding favour with the Emperor.
Gradually people outside the palace began to hear of this absurd
fashion. Mothers bound the feet of their little girls, in such a manner
as to stop their growth. The bones of the toes were bent backwards and
broken, so eager were the elders to have their daughters grow up into
tiny-footed maidens. Thus, for several years of their girlhood the
little ones were compelled to endure the most severe tortures. It was
not long before the new fashion took firm root in China. It became
almost impossible for parents to get husbands for their daughters unless
the girls had suffered the severe pains of foot-binding. And even to
this day we find that many of the people are still under the influence
of Fox Sprite's magic, and believe that a tiny, misshapen foot is more
beautiful than a natural one.
But let us return to the story of Fox Sprite and the wicked Emperor. For
a number of years matters grew continually worse in the country. At last
the people rose in a body against the ruler. A great battle was fought.
The wicked Chow-sin was overthrown and put to death by means of those
very instruments of torture he had used so often against his subjects.
By this time it had become known to all the lords and noblemen that the
Emperor's favourite had been the main cause of their ruler's wickedness;
hence they demanded the death of Fox Sprite. But no one wished to kill
so lovely a creature. Every one appointed refused to do the deed.
Finally, a grey-headed member of the court allowed himself to be
blindfolded. With a sharp sword he pierced the body of Fox Sprite to the
heart. Those standing near covered their eyes with their hands, for they
could not bear to see so wonderful a woman die. Suddenly, as they looked
up, they saw a sight so strange that all were filled with amazement.
Instead of falling to the ground, the graceful form swayed backward and
forward for a moment, when all at once there seemed to spring from her
side a huge mountain fox. The animal glanced around him, then, with a
cry of fear, dashing past officials, courtiers and soldiers, he rushed
through the gate of the enclosure.
"A fox!" cried the people, full of wonder.
At that moment Ta-ki fell in a swoon upon the floor. When they picked
her up, thinking, of course, that she had died from the sword thrust,
they could find no blood on her body, and, on looking more closely, they
saw that there was not even the slightest wound.
"Marvel of marvels!" they all shouted. "The gods have shielded her!"
Just then Ta-ki opened her eyes and looked about her. "Where am I?" she
asked, in faint voice. "Pray tell me what has happened."
Then they told her what they had seen, and at last it was plain to the
beautiful woman that, after all these years, Fox Sprite had left her
body. She was herself once more. For a long time she could not make the
people believe her story; they all said that she must have lost her
mind; that the gods had saved her life, but had punished her for her
wickedness by taking away her reason.
But that night, when her maids were undressing her in the palace, they
saw her feet, which had once more become their natural size, and then
they knew she had been telling the truth.
How Ta-ki became the wife of a good nobleman who had long admired her
great beauty is much too long a story to be told here. Of one thing,
however, we are certain, that she lived long and was happy ever
afterwards.
THE TALKING FISH
Long, long before your great-grandfather was born there lived in the
village of Everlasting Happiness two men called Li and Sing. Now, these
two men were close friends, living together in the same house. Before
settling down in the village of Everlasting Happiness they had ruled as
high officials for more than twenty years. They had often treated the
people very harshly, so that everybody, old and young, disliked and
hated them. And yet, by robbing the wealthy merchants and by cheating
the poor, these two evil companions had become rich, and it was in order
to spend their ill-gotten gains in idle amusements that they sought out
the village of Everlasting Happiness. "For here," said they, "we can
surely find that joy which has been denied us in every other place. Here
we shall no longer be scorned by men and reviled by women."
Consequently these two men bought for themselves the finest house in
the village, furnished it in the most elegant manner, and decorated
the walls with scrolls filled with wise sayings and pictures by famous
artists. Outside there were lovely gardens filled with flowers and
birds, and oh, ever so many trees with queer twisted branches growing
in the shape of tigers and other wild animals.
Whenever they felt lonely Li and Sing invited rich people of the
neighbourhood to come and dine with them, and after they had eaten,
sometimes they would go out upon the little lake in the centre of their
estate, rowing in an awkward flat-bottomed boat that had been built by
the village carpenter.
One day, on such an occasion, when the sun had been beating down
fiercely upon the clean-shaven heads of all those on the little barge,
for you must know this was long before the day when hats were worn--at
least, in the village of Everlasting Happiness--Mr. Li was suddenly
seized with a giddy feeling, which rapidly grew worse and worse until
he was in a burning fever.
"Snake's blood mixed with powdered deer-horn is the thing for him,"
said the wise-looking doctor who was called in, peering at Li carefully
through his huge glasses, "Be sure," he continued, addressing Li's
personal attendant, and, at the same time, snapping his long
finger-nails nervously, "be sure, above all, not to leave him alone, for
he is in danger of going raving mad at any moment, and I cannot say what
he may do if he is not looked after carefully. A man in his condition
has no more sense than a baby."
Now, although these words of the doctor's really made Mr. Li angry, he
was too ill to reply, for all this time his head had been growing hotter
and hotter, until at last a feverish sleep overtook him. No sooner had
he closed his eyes than his faithful servant, half-famished, rushed out
of the room to join his fellows at their mid-day meal.
Li awoke with a start. He had slept only ten minutes. "Water, water,"
he moaned, "bathe my head with cold water. I am half dead with pain!"
But there was no reply, for the attendant was dining happily with his
fellows.
"Air, air," groaned Mr. Li, tugging at the collar of his silk shirt.
"I'm dying for water. I'm starving for air. This blazing heat will kill
me. It is hotter than the Fire god himself ever dreamed of making it.
Wang, Wang!" clapping his hands feebly and calling to his servant,
"air and water, air and water!"
But still no Wang.
At last, with the strength that is said to come from despair, Mr. Li
arose from his couch and staggered toward the doorway. Out he went into
the paved courtyard, and then, after only a moment's hesitation, made
his way across it into a narrow passage that led into the lake garden.
"What do they care for a man when he is sick?" he muttered. "My good
friend Sing is doubtless even now enjoying his afternoon nap, with a
servant standing by to fan him, and a block of ice near his head to cool
the air. What does he care if I die of a raging fever? Doubtless he
expects to inherit all my money. And my servants! That rascal Wang has
been with me these ten years, living on me and growing lazier every
season! What does he care if I pass away? Doubtless he is certain that
Sing's servants will think of something for him to do, and he will have
even less work than he has now. Water, water! I shall die if I don't
soon find a place to soak myself!"
So saying, he arrived at the bank of a little brook that flowed in
through a water gate at one side of the garden and emptied itself into
the big fish-pond. Flinging himself down by a little stream Li bathed
his hands and wrists in the cool water. How delightful! If only it were
deep enough to cover his whole body, how gladly would he cast himself in
and enjoy the bliss of its refreshing embrace!
For a long time he lay on the ground, rejoicing at his escape from the
doctor's clutches. Then, as the fever began to rise again, he sprang up
with a determined cry, "What am I waiting for? I will do it. There's no
one to prevent me, and it will do me a world of good. I will cast myself
head first into the fish-pond. It is not deep enough near the shore to
drown me if I should be too weak to swim, and I am sure it will restore
me to strength and health."
He hastened along the little stream, almost running in his eagerness to
reach the deeper water of the pond. He was like some small Tom Brown who
had escaped from the watchful eye of the master and run out to play in a
forbidden spot.
Hark! Was that a servant calling? Had Wang discovered the absence of his
employer? Would he sound the alarm, and would the whole place soon be
alive with men searching for the fever-stricken patient?
With one last sigh of satisfaction Li flung himself, clothes and all,
into the quiet waters of the fish-pond. Now Li had been brought up in
Fukien province on the seashore, and was a skilful swimmer. He dived and
splashed to his heart's content, then floated on the surface. "It takes
me back to my boyhood," he cried, "why, oh why, is it not the fashion
to swim? I'd love to live in the water all the time and yet some of my
countrymen are even more afraid than a cat of getting their feet wet.
As for me, I'd give anything to stay here for ever."
"You would, eh?" chuckled a hoarse voice just under him, and then there
was a sort of wheezing sound, followed by a loud burst of laughter. Mr.
Li jumped as if an arrow had struck him, but when he noticed the fat,
ugly monster below, his fear turned into anger. "Look here, what do you
mean by giving a fellow such a start! Don't you know what the Classics
say about such rudeness?"
The giant fish laughed all the louder. "What time do you suppose I have
for Classics? You make me laugh till I cry!"
"But you must answer my question," cried Mr. Li, more and more
persistently, forgetting for the moment that he was not trying some poor
culprit for a petty crime. "Why did you laugh? Speak out at once,
fellow!"
"Well, since you are such a saucy piece," roared the other, "I will tell
you. It was because you awkward creatures, who call yourselves men, the
most highly civilized beings in the world, always think you understand a
thing fully when you have only just found out how to do it."
"You are talking about the island dwarfs, the Japanese," interrupted Mr.
Li, "We Chinese seldom undertake to do anything new."
"Just hear the man!" chuckled the fish. "Now, fancy your wishing to stay
in the water for ever! What do you know about water? Why you're not even
provided with the proper equipment for swimming. What would you do if
you really lived here always?"
"What am I doing now?" spluttered Mr. Li, so angry that he sucked in a
mouthful of water before he knew it.
"Floundering," retorted the other.
"Don't you see me swimming? Are those big eyes of yours made of glass?"
"Yes, I see you all right," guffawed the fish, "that's just it! I see
you too well. Why you tumble about as awkwardly as a water buffalo
wallowing in a mud puddle!"
Now, as Mr. Li had always considered himself an expert in water sports,
he was, by this time, speechless with rage, and all he could do was to
paddle feebly round and round with strokes just strong enough to keep
himself from sinking.
"Then, too," continued the fish, more and more calm as the other lost
his temper, "you have a very poor arrangement for breathing. If I am not
mistaken, at the bottom of this pond you would find yourself worse off
than I should be at the top of a palm tree. What would you do to keep
yourself from starving? Do you think it would be convenient if you had
to flop yourself out on to the land every time you wanted a bite to eat?
And yet, being a man, I doubt seriously if you would be content to take
the proper food for fishes. You have hardly a single feature that would
make you contented if you were to join an under-water school. Look at
your clothes, too, water-soaked and heavy. Do you think them suitable
to protect you from cold and sickness? Nature forgot to give you any
scales. Now I'm going to tell you a joke, so you must be sure to laugh.
Fishes are like grocery shops--always judged by their scales. As you
haven't a sign of a scale, how will people judge you? See the point, eh?
Nature gave you a skin, but forgot the outer covering, except, perhaps
at the ends of your fingers and your toes You surely see by this time
why I consider your idea ridiculous?"
Sure enough, in spite of his recent severe attack of fever, Mr. Li had
really cooled completely off. He had never understood before what great
disadvantages there were connected with being a man. Why not make use of
this chance acquaintance, find out from him how to get rid of that
miserable possession he had called his manhood, and gain the delights
that only a fish can have? "Then, are you indeed contented with your
lot?" he asked finally. "Are there not moments when you would prefer to
be a man?"
"I, a man!" thundered the other, lashing the water with his tail. "How
dare you suggest such a disgraceful change! Can it be that you do not
know my rank? Why, my fellow, you behold in me a favourite nephew of
the king!"
"Then, may it please your lordship," said Mr. Li, softly, "I should
be exceedingly grateful if you would speak a kind word for me to your
master. Do you think it possible that he could change me in some manner
into a fish and accept me as a subject?"
"Of course!" replied the other, "all things are possible to the king.
Know you not that my sovereign is a loyal descendant of the great water
dragon, and, as such, can never die, but lives on and on and on, for
ever and ever and ever, like the ruling house of Japan?"
"Oh, oh!" gasped Mr. Li, "even the Son of Heaven, our most worshipful
emperor, cannot boast of such long years. Yes, I would give my fortune
to be a follower of your imperial master."
"Then follow me," laughed the other, starting off at a rate that made
the water hiss and boil for ten feet around him.
Mr. Li struggled vainly to keep up. If he had thought himself a good
swimmer, he now saw his mistake and every bit of remaining pride was
torn to tatters. "Please wait a moment," he cried out politely, "I beg
of you to remember that I am only a man!"
"Pardon me," replied the other, "it was stupid of me to forget,
especially as I had just been talking about it."
Soon they reached a sheltered inlet at the farther side of the pond.
There Mr. Li saw a gigantic carp idly floating about in a shallow pool,
and then lazily flirting his huge tail or fluttering his fins proudly
from side to side. Attendant courtiers darted hither and thither, ready
to do the master's slightest bidding. One of them, splendidly attired in
royal scarlet, announced, with a downward flip of the head, the approach
of the King's nephew who was leading Mr. Li to an audience with his
Majesty.
"Whom have you here, my lad?" began the ruler, as his nephew, hesitating
for words to explain his strange request, moved his fins nervously
backwards and forwards. "Strange company, it seems to me, you are
keeping these days."
"Only a poor man, most royal sir," replied the other, "who beseeches
your Highness to grant him your gracious favour."
  "When man asks favour of a fish,
     'Tis hard to penetrate his wish--
   He often seeks a lordly dish
     To serve upon his table,"
repeated the king, smiling. "And yet, nephew, you think this fellow is
really peaceably inclined and is not coming among us as a spy?"
Before his friend could answer, Mr. Li had cast himself upon his knees
in the shallow water, before the noble carp, and bowed thrice, until his
face was daubed with mud from the bottom of the pool. "Indeed, your
Majesty, I am only a poor mortal who seeks your kindly grace. If you
would but consent to receive me into your school of fishes. I would for
ever be your ardent admirer and your lowly slave."
"In sooth, the fellow talks as if in earnest," remarked the king, after
a moment's reflection, "and though the request is, perhaps, the
strangest to which I have ever listened, I really see no reason why I
should not turn a fishly ear. But, have the goodness first to cease your
bowing. You are stirring up enough mud to plaster the royal palace of a
shark."
Poor Li, blushing at the monarch's reproof, waited patiently for the
answer to his request.
"Very well, so be it," cried the king impulsively, "your wish is
granted. Sir Trout," turning to one of his courtiers, "bring hither a
fish-skin of proper size for this ambitious fellow."
No sooner said than done. The fish-skin was slipped over Mr. Li's head,
and his whole body was soon tucked snugly away in the scaly coat. Only
his arms remained uncovered. In the twinkling of an eye Li felt sharp
pains shoot through every part of his body. His arms began to shrivel up
and his hands changed little by little until they made an excellent pair
of fins, just as good as those of the king himself. As for his legs and
feet, they suddenly began to stick together until, wriggle as he would,
Li could not separate them. "Ah, ha!" thought he, "my kicking days are
over, for my toes are now turned into a first-class tail."
"Not so fast," laughed the king, as Li, after thanking the royal
personage profusely, started out to try his new fins; "not so fast, my
friend. Before you depart, perhaps I'd better give you a little friendly
advice, else your new powers are likely to land you on the hook of some
lucky fisherman, and you will find yourself served up as a prize of the
pond."
"I will gladly listen to your lordly counsel, for the words of the Most
High to his lowly slave are like pearls before sea slugs. However, as I
was once a man myself I think I understand the simple tricks they use to
catch us fish, and I am therefore in position to avoid trouble."
"Don't be so sure about it. 'A hungry carp often falls into danger,'
as one of our sages so wisely remarked. There are two cautions I would
impress upon you. One is, never, never, eat a dangling worm; no matter
how tempting it looks there are sure to be horrible hooks inside.
Secondly, always swim like lightning if you see a net, but in the
opposite direction. Now, I will have you served your first meal out of
the royal pantry, but after that, you must hunt for yourself, like every
other self-respecting citizen of the watery world."
After Li had been fed with several slugs, followed by a juicy worm for
dessert, and after again thanking the king and the king's nephew for
their kindness, he started forth to test his tail and fins. It was no
easy matter, at first, to move them properly. A single flirt of the
tail, no more vigorous than those he had been used to giving with his
legs, would send him whirling round and round in the water, for all
the world like a living top; and when he wriggled his fins, ever so
slightly, as he thought, he found himself sprawling on his back in a
most ridiculous fashion for a dignified member of fishkind. It took
several hours of constant practice to get the proper stroke, and then he
found he could move about without being conscious of any effort. It was
the easiest thing he had ever done in his life; and oh! the water was so
cool and delightful! "Would that I might enjoy that endless life the
poets write of!" he murmured blissfully.
Many hours passed by until at last Li was compelled to admit that,
although he was not tired, he was certainly hungry. How to get something
to eat? Oh! why had he not asked the friendly nephew a few simple
questions? How easily his lordship might have told him the way to get
a good breakfast! But alas! without such advice, it would be a whale's
task to accomplish it. Hither and thither he swam, into the deep
still water, and along the muddy shore; down, down to the pebbly
bottom--always looking, looking for a tempting worm. He dived into the
weeds and rushes, poked his nose among the lily pads. All for nothing!
No fly or worm of any kind to gladden his eager eyes! Another hour
passed slowly away, and all the time his hunger was growing greater and
greater. Would the fish god, the mighty dragon, not grant him even one
little morsel to satisfy his aching stomach, especially since, now that
he was a fish, he had no way of tightening up his belt, as hungry
soldiers do when they are on a forced march?
Just as Li was beginning to think he could not wriggle his tail
an instant longer, and that soon, very soon, he would feel himself
slipping, slipping, slipping down to the bottom of the pond to die--at
that very moment, chancing to look up, he saw, oh joy! a delicious red
worm dangling a few inches above his nose. The sight gave new strength
to his weary fins and tail. Another minute, and he would have had the
delicate morsel in his mouth, when alas! he chanced to recall the advice
given him the day before by great King Carp. "No matter how tempting it
looks, there are sure to be horrible hooks inside." For an instant Li
hesitated. The worm floated a trifle nearer to his half-open mouth. How
tempting! After all, what was a hook to a fish when he was dying? Why be
a coward? Perhaps this worm was an exception to the rule, or perhaps,
perhaps any thing--really a fish in such a plight as Mr. Li could not be
expected to follow advice--even the advice of a real KING.
Pop! He had it in his mouth. Oh, soft morsel, worthy of a king's desire!
Now he could laugh at words of wisdom, and eat whatever came before his
eye. But ugh! What was that strange feeling that--Ouch! it was the fatal
hook!
With one frantic jerk, and a hundred twists and turns, poor Li sought
to pull away from the cruel barb that stuck so fast in the roof of his
mouth. It was now too late to wish he had kept away from temptation.
Better far to have starved at the bottom of the cool pond than to be
jerked out by some miserable fisherman to the light and sunshine of the
busy world. Nearer and nearer he approached the surface. The more he
struggled the sharper grew the cruel barb. Then, with one final splash,
he found himself dangling in mid-air, swinging helplessly at the end of
a long line. With a chunk he fell into a flat-bottomed boat, directly
on top of several smaller fish.
"Ah, a carp!" shouted a well-known voice gleefully; "the biggest fish
I've caught these three moons. What good luck!"
It was the voice of old Chang, the fisherman, who had been supplying
Mr. Li's table ever since that official's arrival in the village of
Everlasting Happiness. Only a word of explanation, and he, Li, would be
free once more to swim about where he willed. And then there should be
no more barbs for him. An escaped fish fears the hook.
"I say, Chang," he began, gasping for breath, "really now, you must
chuck me overboard at once, for, don't you see, I am Mr. Li, your old
master. Come, hurry up about it. I'll excuse you this time for your
mistake, for, of course, you had no way of knowing. Quick!"
But Chang, with a savage jerk, pulled the hook from Li's mouth, and
looked idly towards the pile of glistening fish, gloating over his
catch, and wondering how much money he could demand for it. He had heard
nothing of Mr. Li's remarks, for Chang had been deaf since childhood.
"Quick, quick, I am dying for air," moaned poor Li, and then, with a
groan, he remembered the fisherman's affliction.
By this time they had arrived at the shore, and Li, in company with his
fellow victims, found himself suddenly thrown into a wicker basket. Oh,
the horrors of that journey on land! Only a tiny bit of water remained
in the closely-woven thing. It was all he could do to breathe.
Joy of joys! At the door of his own house he saw his good friend Sing
just coming out. "Hey, Sing," he shouted, at the top of his voice,
"help, help! This son of a turtle wants to murder me. He has me in here
with these fish, and doesn't seem to know that I am Li, his master.
Kindly order him to take me to the lake and throw me in, for it's cool
there and I like the water life much better than that on land."
Li paused to hear Sing's reply, but there came not a single word.
"I beg your honour to have a look at my catch," said old Chang to Sing.
"Here is the finest fish of the season. I have brought him here so that
you and my honoured master, Mr. Li, may have a treat. Carp is his
favourite delicacy."
"Very kind of you, my good Chang, I'm sure, but I fear poor Mr. Li will
not eat fish for some time. He has a bad attack of fever."
"There's where you're wrong," shouted Li, from his basket, flopping
about with all his might, to attract attention, "I'm going to die of a
chill. Can't you recognise your old friend? Help me out of this trouble
and you may have all my money for your pains."
"Hey, what's that!" questioned Sing, attracted, as usual, by the word
money. "Shades of Confucius! It sounds as if the carp were talking."
"What, a talking fish," laughed Chang. "Why, master, I've lived nigh on
to sixty year, and such a fish has never come under my sight. There are
talking birds and talking beasts for that matter; but talking fish, who
ever heard of such a wonder? No, I think your ears must have deceived
you, but this carp will surely cause talk when I get him into the
kitchen. I'm sure the cook has never seen his like. Oh, master! I hope
you will be hungry when you sit down to this fish. What a pity Mr. Li
couldn't help you to devour it!"
"Help to devour myself, eh?" grumbled poor Li, now almost dead for lack
of water. "You must take me for a cannibal, or some other sort of
savage."
Old Chang had now gone round the house to the servants' quarters, and,
after calling out the cook, held up poor Li by the tail for the chef to
inspect.
With a mighty jerk Li tore himself away and fell at the feet of his
faithful cook. "Save me, save me!" he cried out in despair; "this
miserable Chang is deaf and doesn't know that I am Mr. Li, his master.
My fish voice is not strong enough for his hearing. Only take me back to
the pond and set me free. You shall have a pension for life, wear good
clothes and eat good food, all the rest of your days. Only hear me and
obey! Listen, my dear cook, listen!"
"The thing seems to be talking," muttered the cook, "but such wonders
cannot be. Only ignorant old women or foreigners would believe that a
fish could talk." And seizing his former master by the tail, he swung
him on to a table, picked up a knife, and began to whet it on a stone.
"Oh, oh!" screamed Li, "you will stick a knife into me! You will scrape
off my beautiful shiny scales! You will whack off my lovely new fins!
You will murder your old master!"
"Well, you won't talk much longer," growled the cook, "I'll show you a
trick or two with the blade."
So saying, with a gigantic thrust, he plunged the knife deep into the
body of the trembling victim.
With a shrill cry of horror and despair, Mr. Li awoke from the deep
sleep into which he had fallen. His fever was gone, but he found himself
trembling with fear at thought of the terrible death that had come to
him in dreamland.
"Thanks be to Buddha, I am not a fish!" he cried out joyfully; "and now
I shall be well enough to enjoy the feast to which Mr. Sing has bidden
guests for to-morrow. But alas, now that I can eat the old fisherman's
prize carp, it has changed back into myself.
  "If only the good of our dreams came true,
  I shouldn't mind dreaming the whole day through."
BAMBOO AND THE TURTLE
A party of visitors had been seeing the sights at Hsi Ling. They had
just passed down the Holy Way between the huge stone animals when
Bamboo, a little boy of twelve, son of a keeper, rushed out from his
father's house to see the mandarins go by. Such a parade of great men
he had never seen before, even on the feast days. There were ten sedan
chairs, with bearers dressed in flaming colours, ten long-handled, red
umbrellas, each carried far in front of its proud owner, and a long line
of horsemen.
When this gay procession had filed past, Bamboo was almost ready to cry
because he could not run after the sightseers as they went from temple
to temple and from tomb to tomb. But, alas! his father had ordered him
never to follow tourists. "If you do, they will take you for a beggar,
Bamboo," he had said shrewdly, "and if you're a beggar, then your
daddy's one too. Now they don't want any beggars around the royal
tombs." So Bamboo had never known the pleasure of pursuing the rich.
Many times he had turned back to the little mud house, almost
broken-hearted at seeing his playmates running, full of glee, after the
great men's chairs.
On the day when this story opens, just as the last horseman had passed
out of sight among the cedars, Bamboo chanced to look up toward one of
the smaller temple buildings of which his father was the keeper. It was
the house through which the visitors had just been shown. Could his eyes
be deceiving him? No, the great iron doors had been forgotten in the
hurry of the moment, and there they stood wide open, as if inviting him
to enter.
In great excitement he scurried toward the temple. How often he had
pressed his head against the bars and looked into the dark room, wishing
and hoping that some day he might go in. And yet, not once had he been
granted this favour. Almost every day since babyhood he had gazed at the
high stone shaft, or tablet, covered with Chinese writing, that stood
in the centre of the lofty room, reaching almost to the roof. But
with still greater surprise his eyes had feasted on the giant turtle
underneath, on whose back the column rested. There are many such tablets
to be seen in China, many such turtles patiently bearing their loads of
stone, but this was the only sight of the kind that Bamboo had seen. He
had never been outside the Hsi Ling forest, and, of course, knew very
little of the great world beyond.
It is no wonder then that the turtle and the tablet had always
astonished him. He had asked his father to explain the mystery. "Why
do they have a turtle? Why not a lion or an elephant?" For he had seen
stone figures of these animals in the park and had thought them much
better able than his friend, the turtle, to carry loads on their backs.
"Why it's just the custom," his father had replied--the answer always
given when Bamboo asked a question, "just the custom." The boy had tried
to imagine it all for himself, but had never been quite sure that he
was right, and now, joy of all joys, he was about to enter the very
turtle-room itself. Surely, once inside, he could find some answer
to this puzzle of his childhood.
Breathless, he dashed through the doorway, fearing every minute that
some one would notice the open gates and close them before he could
enter. Just in front of the giant turtle he fell in a little heap on the
floor, which was covered inch-deep with dust. His face was streaked, his
clothes were a sight to behold; but Bamboo cared nothing for such
trifles. He lay there for a few moments, not daring to move. Then,
hearing a noise outside, he crawled under the ugly stone beast and
crouched in his narrow hiding-place, as still as a mouse.
"There, there!" said a deep voice. "See what you are doing, stirring up
such a dust! Why, you will strangle me if you are not careful."
It was the turtle speaking, and yet Bamboo's father had often told him
that it was not alive. The boy lay trembling for a minute, too much
frightened to get up and run.
"No use in shaking so, my lad," the voice continued, a little more
kindly. "I suppose all boys are alike--good for nothing but kicking up
a dust." He finished this sentence with a hoarse chuckle, and the boy,
seeing that he was laughing, looked up with wonder at the strange
creature.
"I meant no harm in coming," said the child finally. "I only wanted to
look at you more closely."
"Oh, that was it, hey? Well, that is strange. All the others come and
stare at the tablet on my back. Sometimes they read aloud the nonsense
written there about dead emperors and their titles, but they never so
much as look at me, at me whose father was one of the great four who
made the world."
Bamboo's eyes shone with wonder. "What! your father helped make the
world?" he gasped.
"Well, not my father exactly, but one of my grandfathers, and it amounts
to the same thing, doesn't it. But, hark! I hear a voice. The keeper is
coming back. Run up and close those doors, so he won't notice that they
have not been locked. Then you may hide in the corner there until he has
passed. I have something more to tell you."
Bamboo did as he was told. It took all his strength to swing the heavy
doors into place. He felt very important to think that he was doing
something for the grandson of a maker of the world, and it would have
broken his heart if this visit had been ended just as it was beginning.
Sure enough, his father and the other keepers passed on, never dreaming
that the heavy locks were not fastened as usual. They were talking about
the great men who had just gone. They seemed very happy and were
jingling some coins in their hands.
"Now, my boy," said the stone turtle when the sound of voices had died
away and Bamboo had come out from his corner, "maybe you think I'm proud
of my job. Here I've been holding up this chunk for a hundred years, I
who am fond of travel. During all this time night and day, I have been
trying to think of some way to give up my position. Perhaps it's
honourable, but, you may well imagine, it's not very pleasant."
"I should think you would have the backache," ventured Bamboo timidly.
"Backache! well, I think so; back, neck, legs, eyes, everything I have
is aching, aching for freedom. But, you see, even if I had kicked up
my heels and overthrown this monument, I had no way of getting through
those iron bars," and he nodded toward the gate.
"Yes, I understand," agreed Bamboo, beginning to feel sorry for his old
"But, now that you are here, I have a plan, and a good one it is, too, I
think. The watchmen have forgotten to lock the gate. What is to prevent
my getting my freedom this very night? You open the gate, I walk out,
and no one the wiser."
"But my father will lose his head if they find that he has failed to do
his duty and you have escaped."
"Oh, no; not at all. You can slip his keys to-night, lock the gates
after I am gone, and no one will know just what has happened. Why it
will make this building famous. It won't hurt your father, but will do
him good. So many travellers will be anxious to see the spot from which
I vanished. I am too heavy for a thief to carry off, and they will be
sure that it is another miracle of the gods. Oh, I shall have a good
time out in the big world."
Just here Bamboo began to cry.
"Now what is the silly boy blubbering about?" sneered the turtle. "Is he
nothing but a cry-baby?"
"No, but I don't want you to go."
"Don't want me to go, eh? Just like all the others. You're a fine
fellow! What reason have you for wanting to see me weighed down here all
the rest of my life with a mountain on my back? Why, I thought you were
sorry for me, and it turns out that you are as mean as anybody else."
"It is so lonely here, and I have no playmates. You are the only friend
I have."
The tortoise laughed loudly. "Ho, ho! so it's because I make you a
good playmate, eh? Now, if that's your reason, that's another story
altogether. What do you say to going with me then? I, too, need a
friend, and if you help me to escape, why, you are the very friend
for me."
"But how shall you get the tablet off your back?" questioned Bamboo
doubtfully. "It's very heavy."
"That's easy, just walk out of the door. The tablet is too tall to go
through. It will slide off and sit on the floor instead of on my shell."
Bamboo, wild with delight at the thought of going on a journey with the
turtle, promised to obey the other's commands. After supper, when all
were asleep in the little house of the keeper, he slipped from his bed,
took down the heavy key from its peg, and ran pell-mell to the temple.
"Well, you didn't forget me, did you?" asked the turtle when Bamboo
swung the iron gates open.
"Oh, no, I would not break a promise. Are you ready?"
"Yes, quite ready." So saying, the turtle took a step. The tablet swayed
backward and forward, but did not fall. On walked the turtle until
finally he stuck his ugly head through the doorway. "Oh, how good it
looks outside," he said. "How pleasant the fresh air feels! Is that the
moon rising over yonder? It's the first time I've seen it for an age.
My word! just look at the trees! How they have grown since they set that
tombstone on my back! There's a regular forest outside now."
Bamboo was delighted when he saw the turtle's glee at escaping. "Be
careful," he cried, "not to let the tablet fall hard enough to break
Even as he spoke, the awkward beast waddled through the door. The upper
end of the monument struck against the wall, toppled off, and fell with
a great crash to the floor. Bamboo shivered with fear. Would his father
come and find out what had happened?
"Don't be afraid, my boy. No one will come at this hour of the night to
spy on us."
Bamboo quickly locked the gates, ran back to the house, and hung the
key on its peg. He took a long look at his sleeping parents, and then
returned to his friend. After all, he would not be gone long and his
father would surely forgive him.
Soon the comrades were walking down the broad road, very slowly, for the
tortoise is not swift of foot and Bamboo's legs were none too long.
"Where are you going?" said the boy at last, after he had begun to feel
more at home with the turtle.
"Going? Where should you think I would want to go after my century in
prison? Why, back to the first home of my father, back to the very spot
where the great god, P'anku, and his three helpers hewed out the world."
"And is it far?" faltered the boy, beginning to feel just the least bit
tired.
"At this rate, yes, but, bless my life, you didn't think we could travel
all the way at this snail's pace, I hope. Jump on my back, and I'll show
you how to go. Before morning we shall be at the end of the world, or
rather, the beginning."
"Where is the beginning of the world?" asked Bamboo. "I have never
studied geography."
"We must cross China, then Thibet, and at last in the mountains just
beyond we shall reach the spot which P'anku made the centre of his
labour."
At that moment Bamboo felt himself being lifted from the ground. At
first he thought he would slip off the turtle's rounded shell, and he
cried out in fright.
"Never fear," said his friend. "Only sit quietly, and there will be no
danger."
They had now risen far into the air, and Bamboo could look down over the
great forest of Hsi Ling all bathed in moonlight. There were the broad
white roads leading up to the royal tombs, the beautiful temples, the
buildings where oxen and sheep were prepared for sacrifice, the lofty
towers, and the high tree-covered hills under which the emperors were
buried. Until that night Bamboo had not known the size of this royal
graveyard. Could it be that the turtle would carry him beyond the
forest? Even as he asked himself this question he saw that they had
reached a mountain, and the turtle was ascending higher, still higher,
to cross the mighty wall of stone.
Bamboo grew dizzy as the turtle rose farther into the sky. He felt as he
sometimes did when he played whirling games with his little friends, and
got so dizzy that he tumbled over upon the ground. However, this time
he knew that he must keep his head and not fall, for it must have been
almost a mile to the ground below him. At last they had passed over the
mountain and were flying above a great plain. Far below Bamboo could see
sleeping villages and little streams of water that looked like silver
in the moonlight. Now, directly beneath them was a city. A few feeble
lights could be seen in the dark narrow streets, and Bamboo thought he
could hear the faint cries of peddlers crying their midnight wares.
"That's the capital of Shan-shi just below us," said the turtle,
breaking his long silence. "It is almost two hundred miles from here to
your father's house, and we have taken less than half an hour. Beyond
that is the Province of the Western Valleys. In one hour we shall be
above Thibet."
On they whizzed at lightning speed. If it had not been hot summer time
Bamboo would have been almost frozen. As it was, his hands and feet were
cold and stiff. The turtle, as if knowing how chilly he was, flew nearer
to the ground where it was warmer. How pleasant for Bamboo! He was so
tired that he could keep his eyes open no longer and he was soon soaring
in the land of dreams.
When he waked up it was morning. He was lying on the ground in a wild,
rocky region. Not far away burned a great wood fire, and the turtle was
watching some food that was cooking in a pot.
"Ho, ho, my lad! so you have at last waked up after your long ride. You
see we are a little early. No matter if the dragon does think he can fly
faster, I beat him, didn't I? Why, even the phoenix laughs at me and
says I am slow, but the phoenix has not come yet either. Yes, I have
clearly broken the record for speed, and I had a load to carry too,
which neither of the others had, I am sure."
"Where are we?" questioned Bamboo.
"In the land of the beginning," said the other wisely. "We flew over
Thibet, and then went northwest for two hours. If you haven't studied
geography you won't know the name of the country. But, here we are, and
that is enough, isn't it, enough for any one? And to-day is the yearly
feast-day in honour of the making of the world. It was very fortunate
for me that the gates were left open yesterday. I am afraid my old
friends, the dragon and the phoenix, have almost forgotten what I look
like. It is so long since they saw me. Lucky beasts they are, not to be
loaded down under an emperor's tablet. Hello! I hear the dragon coming
now, if I am not mistaken. Yes, here he is. How glad I am to see him!"
Bamboo heard a great noise like the whirr of enormous wings, and then,
looking up, saw a huge dragon just in front of him. He knew it was a
dragon from the pictures he had seen and the carvings in the temples.
The dragon and the turtle had no sooner greeted each other, both very
happy at the meeting, than they were joined by a queer-looking bird,
unlike any that Bamboo had ever seen, but which he knew was the
phoenix. This phoenix looked somewhat like a wild swan, but it had
the bill of a cock, the neck of a snake, the tail of a fish and the
stripes of a dragon. Its feathers were of five colours.
When the three friends had chatted merrily for a few minutes, the turtle
told them how Bamboo had helped him to escape from the temple.
"A clever boy," said the dragon, patting Bamboo gently on the back.
"Yes, yes, a clever boy indeed," echoed the phoenix.
"Ah," sighed the turtle, "if only the good god, P'anku, were here,
shouldn't we be happy! But, I fear he will never come to this
meeting-place. No doubt he is off in some distant spot, cutting out
another world. If I could only see him once more, I feel that I should
die in peace."
"Just listen!" laughed the dragon. "As if one of us could die! Why, you
talk like a mere mortal."
All day long the three friends chatted, feasted, and had a good time
looking round at the places where they had lived so happily when P'anku
had been cutting out the world. They were good to Bamboo also and showed
him many wonderful things of which he had never dreamed.
"You are not half so mean-looking and so fierce as they paint you on the
flags," said Bamboo in a friendly voice to the dragon just as they were
about to separate.
The three friends laughed heartily.
"Oh, no, he's a very decent sort of fellow, even if he is covered with
fish-scales," joked the phoenix.
Just before they bade each other good-bye, the phoenix gave Bamboo a
long scarlet tail-feather for a keepsake, and the dragon gave him a
large scale which turned to gold as soon as the boy took it into his
"Come, come, we must hurry," said the turtle. "I am afraid your father
will think you are lost." So Bamboo, after having spent the happiest day
of his life, mounted the turtle's back, and they rose once more above
the clouds. Back they flew even faster than they had come. Bamboo had so
many things to talk about that he did not once think of going to sleep,
for he had really seen the dragon and the phoenix, and if he never
were to see anything else in his life, he would always be happy.
Suddenly the turtle stopped short in his swift flight, and Bamboo felt
himself slipping. Too late he screamed for help, too late he tried to
save himself. Down, down from that dizzy height he tumbled, turning,
twisting, thinking of the awful death that was surely coming. Swish!
he shot through the tree tops trying vainly to clutch the friendly
branches. Then with a loud scream he struck the ground, and his long
journey was ended.
[Illustration: "AH," SIGHED THE TURTLE, "IF ONLY THE GOOD GOD, P'ANKU,
WERE HERE."]
"Come out from under that turtle, boy! What are you doing inside the
temple in the dirt? Don't you know this is not the proper place for
Bamboo rubbed his eyes. Though only half awake, he knew it was his
father's voice.
"But didn't it kill me?" he said as his father pulled him out by the
heel from under the great stone turtle.
"What killed you, foolish boy? What can you be talking about? But I'll
half-kill you if you don't hurry out of this and come to your supper.
Really I believe you are getting too lazy to eat. The idea of sleeping
the whole afternoon under that turtle's belly!"
Bamboo, not yet fully awake, stumbled out of the tablet room, and his
father locked the iron doors.
THE MAD GOOSE AND THE TIGER FOREST
Hu-lin was a little slave girl. She had been sold by her father when
she was scarcely more than a baby, and had lived for five years with
a number of other children in a wretched houseboat. Her cruel master
treated her very badly. He made her go out upon the street, with the
other girls he had bought, to beg for a living. This kind of life was
especially hard for Hu-lin. She longed to play in the fields, above
which the huge kites were sailing in the air like giant birds. She liked
to see the crows and magpies flying hither and thither. It was great fun
to watch them build their stick nests in the tall poplars. But if her
master ever caught her idling her time away in this manner he beat her
most cruelly and gave her nothing to eat for a whole day. In fact he was
so wicked and cruel that all the children called him Black Heart.
Early one morning when Hu-lin was feeling very sad about the way she was
treated, she resolved to run away, but, alas! she had not gone more than
a hundred yards from the houseboat when she saw Black Heart following
her. He caught her, scolded her most dreadfully, and gave her such a
beating that she felt too faint to stir.
For several hours she lay on the ground without moving a muscle, moaning
as if her heart would break. "Ah! if only someone would save me!" she
thought, "how good I would be all the rest of my days!"
Now, not far from the river there lived an old man in a tumble-down
shanty. The only companion he had was a goose that watched the gate for
him at night and screamed out loudly if any stranger dared to prowl
about the place. Hu-lin and this goose were close friends, and the slave
girl often stopped to chat with the wise fowl as she was passing the old
man's cottage. In this way she had learned that the bird's owner was a
miser who kept a great deal of money hidden in his yard. Ch'ang, the
goose, had an unusually long neck, and was thus able to pry into most of
his master's affairs. As the fowl had no member of his own family to
talk with, he told all he knew to Hu-lin.
On the very morning when Black Heart gave Hu-lin a beating for trying
to run away, Ch'ang made a startling discovery. His lord and master was
not really an old miser, but a young man in disguise. Ch'ang, feeling
hungry, had slipped into the house at daybreak to see if any scraps had
been left from the last evening's meal. The bedroom door had blown open
in the night, and there lay a young man sound asleep, instead of the
greybeard whom the gander called his master. Then, before his very eyes,
the youth changed suddenly into his former shape and was an old man
In his excitement, forgetting all about his empty stomach, the
terror-stricken goose rushed out into the yard to think over the
mystery, but the longer he puzzled, the more strange it all seemed. Then
he thought of Hu-lin, and wished that she would come by, that he might
ask her opinion. He had a high regard for the slave girl's knowledge and
believed that she would understand fully what had taken place.
Ch'ang went to the gate. As usual, it was locked, and there was nothing
for him to do but wait for his master to rise. Two hours later the miser
walked out into the yard. He seemed in good spirits, and he gave Ch'ang
more to eat than usual. After taking his morning smoke on the street in
front of the house, he strolled around it leaving the front gate ajar.
This was precisely what the gander had been expecting. Slipping quietly
into the road, he turned towards the river where he could see the
houseboats lined up at the wharf. On the sand near by lay a well-known
form.
"Hu-lin," he called as he drew near, "wake up, for I have something to
tell you."
"I am not asleep," she answered, turning her tear-stained face towards
her friend.
"Why, what's the matter? You've been crying again. Has old Black Heart
been beating you?"
"Hush! he's taking a nap in the boat. Don't let him hear you."
"It's not likely he would understand goose-talk if he did," replied
Ch'ang, smiling. "However, I suppose it's always best to be on the safe
side, so I'll whisper what I have to say."
Putting his bill close to her ear, he told Hu-lin of his recent
discovery, and ended by asking her to tell him what it all meant.
The child forgot her own misery at hearing his wonderful story. "Are you
quite sure there was not some friend of the miser's spending the night
with him?" she asked gravely.
"Yes, yes, perfectly sure, for he has no friends," replied the gander.
"Besides, I was in the house just before he locked up for the night, and
I saw neither hair nor hide of any other person."
"Then he must be a fairy in disguise!" announced Hu-lin wisely.
"A fairy! what's that?" questioned Ch'ang, more and more excited.
"Why, you old goose, don't you know what a fairy is?" And Hu-lin laughed
outright. By this time she had forgotten her own troubles and was
becoming more and more amused at what she had heard. "Hark!" she said in
a low tone, and speaking very slowly, "a fairy is----" Here she lowered
her voice to a whisper.
The gander nodded violently as she went on with her explanation, and
when she had finished, was speechless with amazement, for a few moments.
"Well," he said finally, "if my master is that kind of man, suppose you
slip away quietly and come with me, for, if a fairy is what you say he
is, he can save you from all your troubles and make me happy for the
rest of my days."
[Illustration: "PUTTING HIS BILL TO HER EAR, HE TOLD HU-LIN OF HIS
RECENT DISCOVERY."]
"I wonder if I dare?" she answered, looking round fearfully towards the
houseboat, from the open scuttle of which came the sound of deep
snoring.
"Yes, yes, of course!" coaxed Ch'ang. "He gave you such a beating that
he won't be afraid of your taking to your heels again very soon."
Hurriedly they went to the miser's compound. Hu-lin's heart was beating
fast as she tried to decide what to say when she should actually stand
before the fairy. The gate was still partly open and the two friends
entered boldly.
"Come this way," said Ch'ang. "He must be in the back-yard digging in
his garden."
But when they reached the vegetable patch there was no one to be seen.
"This is very strange," whispered the gander. "I don't understand it,
for I have never known him to grow tired of work so early. Surely he
cannot have gone in to rest."
Led by her friend, Hu-lin entered the house on tiptoe. The door of the
miser's bedroom stood wide open, and they saw that there was no one
either in that room or any other room of the miserable cottage.
"Come! let's see what kind of bed he sleeps on," said Hu-lin, filled
with curiosity. "I have never been in a fairy's room. It must be
different from other people's rooms."
"No, no! just a plain brick bed, like all the rest," answered Ch'ang, as
they crossed the threshold.
"Does he have a fire in cold weather?" asked Hu-lin, stooping to examine
the small fire hole in the bricks.
"Oh, yes, a hot fire every night, and even in spring when other people
have stopped having fires, the brick bed is hot every night."
"Well, that's rather strange for a miser, don't you think?" said the
girl. "It costs more to keep a fire going than it does to feed a man."
"Yes, that's true," agreed Ch'ang, pruning his feathers. "I hadn't
thought of that. It is strange, very. Hu-lin, you're a wise child. Where
did you learn so much?"
At that moment the gander turned pale at hearing the gate slam loudly
and the bar thrown into place.
"Good gracious! what ever shall we do?" asked Hu-lin. "What will he say
if he finds us here?"
"No telling," said the other, trembling, "but, my dear little friend, we
are certainly caught, for we can't get away without his seeing us."
"Yes, and I've already had one beating to-day! And such a hard one that
I don't believe I could live through another," sighed the child, as the
tears began to flow.
"There, there, little girl, don't worry! Let's hide in this dark corner
behind the baskets," suggested the gander, just as the master's step was
heard at the front door.
Soon the frightened companions were crouching on the ground, trying
to hide. Much to their relief, however, the miser did not go into his
bedroom, and they soon heard him hard at work in the garden. All that
day the two remained in their hiding place, afraid to show themselves
outside the door.
"I can't imagine what he would say if he found out that his watch-goose
had brought a stranger into the house," said Ch'ang.
"Perhaps he would think we were trying to steal some of the money he
has hidden away," she answered, laughing, for as Hu-lin became used
to her cramped quarters she grew less frightened. At any rate she
was not nearly so much afraid of the miser as she had thought she was.
"Besides," she reflected, "he can't be so bad as old Black Heart."
Thus the day wore on and darkness fell over the land. By this time girl
and goose were fast asleep in one corner of the miser's room and knew
nothing more of what was happening.
When the first light of a new day filtered through the paper-covered
window above the miser's bed, Hu-lin awoke with a start, and at first
she could not think where she was. Ch'ang was staring at her with
wide-open frightened eyes that seemed to be asking, "What can it all
mean? It is more than my goose brain can think out."
For on the bed, instead of the miser, there lay a young man whose hair
was a black as a raven's wing. A faint smile lightened up his handsome
face, as if he was enjoying some delightful dream. A cry of wonder
escaped Hu-lin's lips before she could hold it back. The sleeper's eyes
opened instantly and were fixed upon her. The girl was so frightened
that she could not move, and the gander trembled violently as he saw the
change that had come over his master.
The young man was even more surprised than his guests, and for two
minutes he was speechless. "What does this mean?" he asked, finally,
looking at Ch'ang. "What are you doing in my bedroom and who is this
child who seems so frightened?"
"Forgive me, kind sir, but what have you done to my master?" asked the
gander, giving question for question.
"Am I not your master, you mad creature?" said the man, laughing. "You
are more stupid than ever this morning."
"My master was old and ugly, but you are still young and handsome,"
replied Ch'ang in a tone of flattery.
"What," shouted the other, "you say I am still young?"
"Why, yes. Ask Hu-lin, if you don't believe me."
The man turned towards the little girl.
"Yes, indeed you are, sir," she replied in answer to his look. "Never
have I seen a man so beautiful."
"At last! at last!" he cried, laughing joyfully, "I am free, free, free
from all my troubles, but how it has come about is more than I can say!"
For a few minutes he stood in a deep study, snapping his long fingers
as if trying to solve some hard problem. At last a smile lighted up his
face. "Ch'ang," he asked, "what was it you called your guest when you
spoke of her a minute ago?"
"I am Hu-lin," said the child simply, "Hu-lin, the slave girl."
He clapped his hands. "That's right! That's right!" he cried. "I see it
all now; it is as plain as day." Then, noticing the look of wonder on
her face, "It is to you that I owe my freedom from a wicked fairy, and
if you like, I'll tell you the story of my misfortune."
"Pray do, kind sir," she replied eagerly. "I told Ch'ang that you were
a fairy, and I should like to know if I was right."
"Well, you see," he began, "my father is a rich man who lives in a
distant county. When I was a boy he gave me everything I wished. I was
so humoured and petted from earliest childhood that at last I began to
think there was nothing at all in the world I could not have for the
asking, and nothing that I must not do if I wished to.
"My teacher often scolded me for having such notions. He told me there
was a proverb: 'Men die for gain, birds perish to get food.' He thought
such men were very foolish. He told me that money would go a long way
towards making a man happy, but he always ended by saying that the gods
were more powerful than men. He said I must always be careful not to
make the evil spirits angry. Sometimes I laughed in his face, telling
him that I was rich and could buy the favour of gods and fairies. The
good man would shake his head, saying, 'Take care, my boy, or you will
be sorry for these rash speeches.'"
"One day, after he had been giving me a long lecture of this sort, we
were walking in the garden of my father's compound. I was even more
daring than usual and told him that I cared nothing for the rules other
people followed. 'You say,' said I, 'that this well here in my father's
yard is ruled by a spirit, and that if I were to anger him by jumping
over it, he would be vexed and give me trouble.' 'Yes,' said he, 'that
is exactly what I said, and I repeat it. Beware, young man, beware of
idle boasting and of breaking the law.' 'What do I care for a spirit
that lives on my father's land?' I answered with a sneer. 'I don't
believe there is a spirit in this well. If there is, it is only another
of my father's slaves.'
"So saying, and before my tutor could stop me, I leaped across the mouth
of the well. No sooner had I touched the ground than I felt a strange
shrinking of my body. My strength left me in the twinkling of an eye,
my bones shortened, my skin grew yellow and wrinkled. I looked at my
pigtail and found that the hair had suddenly grown thin and white. In
every way I had been changed completely into an old man.
"My teacher stared at me in amazement, and when I asked him what it all
meant my voice was as shrill as that of early childhood. 'Alas! my dear
pupil,' he replied, 'now you will believe what I told you. The spirit of
the well is angry at your wicked conduct and has punished you. You have
been told a hundred times that it is wrong to leap over a well; yet you
did this very thing,' 'But is there nothing that can be done,' I cried;
'is there no way of restoring my lost youth?' He looked at me sadly and
shook his head.
"When my father learned of my sad condition he was terribly upset. He
did everything that could be done to find some way for me to regain my
youth. He had incense burned at a dozen temples and he himself offered
up prayers to various gods. I was his only son, and he could not be
happy without me. At last, when everything else had been done, my worthy
teacher thought of asking a fortune-teller who had become famous in the
city. After inquiring about everything that had led up to my sad plight,
the wise man said that the spirit of the well, as a punishment, had
changed me into a miser. He said that only when I was sleeping would
I be in my natural state, and even then if any one chanced to enter my
room or catch a glimpse of my face, I would be at once changed back into
a greybeard."
"I saw you yesterday morning," shouted the gander. "You were young and
handsome, and then before my very eyes you were changed back into an old
man!"
"To continue my story," said the young man, "the fortune-teller at last
announced that there was only one chance for my recovery and that a very
small one. If at any time, while I was in my rightful shape, that is, as
you see me now, a mad goose should come in, leading a tiger-forest out
of slavery, the charm would be broken, and the evil spirit would no
longer have control over me. When the fortune-teller's answer was
brought to my father, he gave up hope, and so did I, for no one
understood the meaning of such a senseless riddle.
"That night I left my native city, resolved not to disgrace my people
any longer by living with them. I came to this place, bought this house
with some money my father had given me, and at once began living the
life of a miser. Nothing satisfied my greed for money. Everything must
be turned into cash. For five years I have been storing away money, and,
at the same time, starving myself, body and soul.
"Soon after my arrival here, remembering the fortune-teller's riddle,
I decided that I would keep a goose to serve as night watch-man instead
of a dog. In this way I made a start at working out the riddle."
"But I am not a mad goose," hissed the gander angrily. "If it had not
been for me you would still be a wrinkled miser."
"Quite right, dear Ch'ang, quite right," said the young man soothingly;
"you were not mad; so I gave you the name Ch'ang, which means mad, and
thus made a mad goose of you."
"Oh, I see," said Hu-lin and Ch'ang together. "How clever!"
"So, you see, I had part of my cure here in my back-yard all the time;
but though I thought as hard as I could, I could think of no way of
securing that Ch'ang should lead a tiger-forest into my room while I was
sleeping. The thing seemed absurd, and I soon gave up trying to study it
out. To-day by accident it has really come to pass."
"So I am the tiger-forest, am I?" laughed Hu-lin.
"Yes, indeed, you are, my dear child, a pretty little tiger-forest, for
Hu means tiger, and lin is surely good Chinese for a grove of
trees. Then, too, you told me you were a slave girl. Hence, Ch'ang led
you out of slavery."
"Oh, I am so glad!" said Hu-lin, forgetting her own poverty, "so glad
that you don't have to be a horrible old miser any longer."
Just at that moment there was a loud banging on the front gate.
"Who can be knocking in that fashion?" asked the young man in
astonishment.
"Alas! it must be Black Heart, my master," said Hu-lin, beginning to
cry.
"Don't be frightened," said the youth, soothingly stroking the child's
head. "You have saved me, and I shall certainly do as much for you. If
this Mr. Black Heart doesn't agree to a fair proposal he shall have a
black eye to remember his visit by."
It did not take long for the grateful young man to buy Hu-lin's liberty,
especially as he offered as much for her freedom as her master had
expected to get when she was fourteen or fifteen years of age.
When Hu-lin was told of the bargain she was wild with delight. She bowed
low before her new master and then, kneeling, touched her head nine
times on the floor. Rising, she cried out, "Oh, how happy I am, for now
I shall be yours for ever and ever and ever, and good old Ch'ang shall
be my playmate."
"Yes, indeed," he assured her, "and when you are a little older I shall
make you my wife. At present you will go with me to my father's house
and become my little betrothed."
"And I shall never again have to beg for crusts on the street?" she
asked him, her eyes full of wonder.
"No! never!" he answered, laughing, "and you need never fear another
beating."
THE NODDING TIGER
Just outside the walls of a Chinese city there lived a young woodcutter
named T'ang and his old mother, a woman of seventy. They were very poor
and had a tiny one-room shanty, built of mud and grass, which they
rented from a neighbour. Every day young T'ang rose bright and early and
went up on the mountain near their house. There he spent the day cutting
firewood to sell in the city near by. In the evening he would return
home, take the wood to market, sell it, and bring back food for his
mother and himself. Now, though these two people were poor, they were
very happy, for the young man loved his mother dearly, and the old woman
thought there was no one like her son in all the world. Their friends,
however, felt sorry for them and said, "What a pity we have no
grasshoppers here, so that the T'angs could have some food from heaven!"
One day young T'ang got up before daylight and started for the hills,
carrying his axe on his shoulder. He bade his mother good-bye, telling
her that he would be back early with a heavier load of wood than usual,
for the morrow would be a holiday and they must eat good food. All day
long Widow T'ang waited patiently, saying to herself over and over as
she went about her simple work, "The good boy, the good boy, how he
loves his old mother!"
In the afternoon she began watching for his return--but in vain.
The sun was sinking lower and lower in the west, but still he did not
come. At last the old woman was frightened. "My poor son!" she muttered.
"Something has happened to him." Straining her feeble eyes, she looked
along the mountain path. Nothing was to be seen there but a flock of
sheep following the shepherd. "Woe is me!" moaned the woman. "My boy!
my boy!" She took her crutch from its corner and limped off to a
neighbour's house to tell him of her trouble and beg him to go and look
for the missing boy.
Now this neighbour was kind-hearted, and willing to help old Mother
T'ang, for he felt very sorry for her. "There are many wild beasts in
the mountains," he said, shaking his head as he walked away with her,
thinking to prepare the frightened woman for the worst, "and I fear that
your son has been carried off by one of them." Widow T'ang gave a scream
of horror and sank upon the ground. Her friend walked slowly up the
mountain path, looking carefully for signs of a struggle. At last when
he had gone half way up the slope he came to a little pile of torn
clothing spattered with blood. The woodman's axe was lying by the side
of the path, also his carrying pole and some rope. There could be no
mistake: after making a brave fight, the poor youth had been carried off
by a tiger.
Gathering up the torn garments, the man went sadly down the hill. He
dreaded seeing the poor mother and telling her that her only boy was
indeed gone for ever. At the foot of the mountain he found her still
lying on the ground. When she looked up and saw what he was carrying,
with a cry of despair she fainted away. She did not need to be told what
Friends bore her into the little house and gave her food, but they could
not comfort her. "Alas!" she cried, "of what use is it to live? He was
my only boy. Who will take care of me in my old age? Why have the gods
treated me in this cruel way?"
She wept, tore her hair, and beat her chest, until people said she had
gone mad. The longer she mourned, the more violent she became.
The next day, however, much to the surprise of her neighbours, she set
out for the city, making her way along slowly by means of her crutch. It
was a pitiful sight to see her, so old, so feeble, and so lonely. Every
one was sorry for her and pointed her out, saying, "See! the poor old
soul has no one to help her!"
In the city she asked her way to the public hall. When she found the
place she knelt at the front gate, calling out loudly and telling of her
ill-fortune. Just at this moment the mandarin, or city judge, walked
into the court room to try any cases which might be brought before him.
He heard the old woman weeping and wailing outside, and bade one of the
servants let her enter and tell him of her wrongs.
Now this was just what the Widow T'ang had come for. Calming herself,
she hobbled into the great hall of trial.
"What is the matter, old woman? Why do you raise such an uproar in front
of my yamen? Speak up quickly and tell me of your trouble."
"I am old and feeble," she began; "lame and almost blind. I have no
money and no way of earning money. I have not one relative now in all
the empire. I depended on my only son for a living. Every day he climbed
the mountain, for he was a woodcutter, and every evening he came back
home, bringing enough money for our food. But yesterday he went and did
not return. A mountain tiger carried him off and ate him, and now, alas!
there seems to be no help for it--I must die of hunger. My bleeding
heart cries out for justice. I have come into this hall to-day, to beg
your worship to see that the slayer of my son is punished. Surely the
law says that none may shed blood without giving his own blood in
payment."
"But, woman, are you mad?" cried the mandarin, laughing loudly. "Did you
not say it was a tiger that killed your son? How can a tiger be brought
to justice? Of a truth, you must have lost your senses."
The judge's questions were of no avail. The Widow T'ang kept up her
clamour. She would not be turned away until she had gained her purpose.
The hall echoed with the noise of her howling. The mandarin could stand
it no longer. "Hold! woman," he cried, "stop your shrieking. I will do
what you ask. Only go home and wait until I summon you to court. The
slayer of your son shall be caught and punished."
The judge was, of course, only trying to get rid of the demented mother,
thinking that if she were only once out of his sight, he could give
orders not to let her into the hall again. The old woman, however, was
too sharp for him. She saw through his plan and became more stubborn
than ever.
"No, I cannot go," she answered, "until I have seen you sign the order
for that tiger to be caught and brought into this judgment hall."
Now, as the judge was not really a bad man, he decided to humour the old
woman in her strange plea. Turning to the assistants in the court room
he asked which of them would be willing to go in search of the tiger.
One of these men, named Li-neng, had been leaning against the wall, half
asleep. He had been drinking heavily and so had not heard what had been
going on in the room. One of his friends gave him a poke in the ribs
just as the judge asked for volunteers.
Thinking the judge had called him by name, he stepped forward, knelt on
the floor, saying, "I, Li-neng, can go and do the will of your worship."
"Very well, you will do," answered the judge. "Here is your order. Go
forth and do your duty." So saying, he handed the warrant to Li-neng.
"Now, old woman, are you satisfied?" he continued.
"Quite satisfied, your worship," she replied.
"Then go home and wait there until I send for you."
Mumbling a few words of thanks, the unhappy mother left the building.
When Li-neng went outside the court room, his friends crowded round him.
"Drunken sot!" they laughed; "do you know what you have done?"
Li-neng shook his head. "Just a little business for the mandarin, isn't
it? Quite easy."
"Call it easy, if you like. What! man, arrest a tiger, a man-eating
tiger and bring him to the city! Better go and say good-bye to your
father and mother. They will never see you again."
Li-neng slept off his drunkenness, and then saw that his friends were
right. He had been very foolish. But surely the judge had meant the
whole thing only as a joke! No such order had ever been written before!
It was plain that the judge had hit on this plan simply to get rid of
the wailing old woman. Li-neng took the warrant back to the judgment
hall and told the mandarin that the tiger could not be found.
But the judge was in no mood for joking. "Can't be found? And why not?
You agreed to arrest this tiger. Why is it that to-day you try to get
out of your promise? I can by no means permit this, for I have given my
word to satisfy the old woman in her cry for justice."
Li-neng knelt and knocked his head on the floor. "I was drunk," he
cried, "when I gave my promise. I knew not what you were asking. I can
catch a man, but not a tiger. I know nothing of such matters. Still, if
you wish it, I can go into the hills and hire hunters to help me."
"Very well, it makes no difference how you catch him, as long as you
bring him into court. If you fail in your duty, there is nothing left
but to beat you until you succeed. I give you five days."
During the next few days Li-neng left no stone unturned in trying to
find the guilty tiger. The best hunters in the country were employed.
Night and day they searched the hills, hiding in mountain caves,
watching and waiting, but finding nothing. It was all very trying for
Li-neng, since he now feared the heavy hands of the judge more than the
claws of the tiger. On the fifth day he had to report his failure. He
received a thorough beating, fifty blows on the back. But that was not
the worst of it. During the next six weeks, try as he would, he could
find no traces of the missing animal. At the end of each five days, he
got another beating for his pains. The poor fellow was in despair.
Another month of such treatment would lay him on his deathbed. This he
knew very well, and yet he had little hope. His friends shook their
heads when they saw him. "He is drawing near the wood," they said to
each other, meaning that he would soon be in his coffin. "Why don't you
flee the country?" they asked him. "Follow the tiger's example. You see
he has escaped completely. The judge would make no effort to catch you
if you should go across the border into the next province."
Li-neng shook his head on hearing this advice. He had no desire to leave
his family for ever, and he felt sure of being caught and put to death
if he should try to run away.
One day after all the hunters had given up the search in disgust and
gone back to their homes in the valley, Li-neng entered a mountain
temple to pray. The tears rained down his cheeks as he knelt before the
great fierce-looking idol. "Alas! I am a dead man!" he moaned between
his prayers; "a dead man, for now there is no hope. Would that I had
never touched a drop of wine!"
Just then he heard a slight rustling near by. Looking up, he saw a huge
tiger standing at the temple gate. But Li-neng was no longer afraid of
tigers. He knew there was only one way to save himself. "Ah," he said,
looking the great cat straight in the eye, "you have come to eat me,
have you? Well, I fear you would find my flesh a trifle tough, since I
have been beaten with four hundred blows during these six weeks. You are
the same fellow that carried off the woodman last month, aren't you?
This woodman was an only son, the sole support of an old mother. Now
this poor woman has reported you to the mandarin, who, in turn, has had
a warrant drawn up for your arrest. I have been sent out to find you and
lead you to trial. For some reason or other you have acted the coward,
and remained in hiding. This has been the cause of my beating. Now I
don't want to suffer any longer as a result of your murder. You must
come with me to the city and answer the charge of killing the woodman."
All the time Li-neng was speaking, the tiger listened closely. When
the man was silent, the animal made no effort to escape, but, on the
contrary, seemed willing and ready to be captured. He bent his head
forward and let Li-neng slip a strong chain over it. Then he followed
the man quietly down the mountain, through the crowded streets of the
city, into the court room. All along the way there was great excitement.
"The man-slaying tiger has been caught," shouted the people. "He is
being led to trial."
The crowd followed Li-neng into the hall of justice. When the judge
walked in, every one became as quiet as the grave. All were filled with
wonder at the strange sight of a tiger being called before a judge.
The great animal did not seem to be afraid of those who were watching so
curiously. He sat down in front of the mandarin, for all the world like
a huge cat. The judge rapped on the table as a signal that all was ready
for the trial.
"Tiger," said he, turning toward the prisoner, "did you eat the woodman
whom you are charged with killing?"
The tiger gravely nodded his head.
"Yes, he killed my boy!" screamed the aged mother. "Kill him! Give him
the death that he deserves!"
"A life for a life is the law of the land," continued the judge, paying
no attention to the forlorn mother, but looking the accused directly
in the eye. "Did you not know it? You have robbed a helpless old woman
of her only son. There are no relatives to support her. She is crying
for vengeance. You must be punished for your crime. The law must be
enforced. However, I am not a cruel judge. If you can promise to take
the place of this widow's son and support the woman in her old age, I am
quite willing to spare you from a disgraceful death. What say you, will
you accept my offer?"
[Illustration: "THE TIGER GRAVELY NODDED HIS HEAD."]
The gaping people craned their necks to see what would happen, and once
more they were surprised to see the savage beast nod his head in silent
agreement.
"Very well, then, you are free to return to your mountain home; only, of
course, you must remember your promise."
The chains were taken from the tiger's neck, and the great animal walked
silently out of the yamen, down the street, and through the gate opening
towards his beloved mountain cave.
Once more the old woman was very angry. As she hobbled from the room,
she cast sour glances at the judge, muttering over and over again, "Who
ever heard of a tiger taking the place of a son? A pretty game this is,
to catch the brute, and then to set him free." There was nothing for her
to do, however, but to return home, for the judge had given strict
orders that on no account was she to appear before him again.
Almost broken-hearted she entered her desolate hovel at the foot of the
mountain. Her neighbours shook their heads as they saw her. "She cannot
live long," they said. "She has the look of death on her wrinkled face.
Poor soul! she has nothing to live for, nothing to keep her from
starving."
But they were mistaken. Next morning when the old woman went outside to
get a breath of fresh air she found a newly killed deer in front of her
door. Her tiger-son had begun to keep his promise, for she could see the
marks of his claws on the dead animal's body. She took the carcass into
the house and dressed it for the market. On the city streets next day
she had no trouble in selling the flesh and skin for a handsome sum of
money. All had heard of the tiger's first gift, and no one was anxious
to drive a close bargain.
Laden with food, the happy woman went home rejoicing, with money enough
to keep her for many a day. A week later the tiger came to her door
with a roll of cloth and some money in his mouth. He dropped these new
gifts at her feet and ran away without even waiting for her thank-you.
The Widow T'ang now saw that the judge had acted wisely. She stopped
grieving for her dead son and began to love in his stead the handsome
animal that had come to take his place so willingly.
The tiger grew much attached to his foster-mother and often purred
contentedly outside her door, waiting for her to come and stroke his
soft fur. He no longer had the old desire to kill. The sight of blood
was not nearly so tempting as it had been in his younger days. Year
after year he brought the weekly offerings to his mistress until she was
as well provided for as any other widow in the country.
At last in the course of nature the good old soul died. Kind friends
laid her away in her last resting place at the foot of the great
mountain. There was money enough left out of what she had saved to put
up a handsome tombstone, on which this story was written just as you
have read it here. The faithful tiger mourned long for his dear
mistress. He lay on her grave, wailing like a child that had lost its
mother. Long he listened for the voice he had loved so well, long he
searched the mountain-slopes, returning each night to the empty cottage,
but all in vain. She whom he loved was gone for ever.
One night he vanished from the mountain, and from that day to this no
one in that province has ever seen him. Some who know this story say
that he died of grief in a secret cave which he had long used as a
hiding-place. Others add, with a wise shrug of the shoulders, that, like
Shanwang, he was taken to the Western Heaven, there to be rewarded for
his deeds of virtue and to live as a fairy for ever afterwards.
THE PRINCESS KWAN-YIN
Once upon a time in China there lived a certain king who had three
daughters. The fairest and best of these was Kwan-yin, the youngest.
The old king was justly proud of this daughter, for of all the women who
had ever lived in the palace she was by far the most attractive. It did
not take him long, therefore, to decide that she should be the heir to
his throne, and her husband ruler of his kingdom. But, strange to say,
Kwan-yin was not pleased at this good fortune. She cared little for the
pomp and splendour of court life. She foresaw no pleasure for herself in
ruling as a queen, but even feared that in so high a station she might
feel out of place and unhappy.
Every day she went to her room to read and study. As a result of this
daily labour she soon went far beyond her sisters along the paths of
knowledge, and her name was known in the farthest corner of the kingdom
as "Kwan-yin, the wise princess." Besides being very fond of books,
Kwan-yin was thoughtful of her friends. She was careful about her
behaviour both in public and in private. Her warm heart was open at all
times to the cries of those in trouble. She was kind to the poor and
suffering. She won the love of the lower classes, and was to them a sort
of goddess to whom they could appeal whenever they were hungry and in
need. Some people even believed that she was a fairy who had come to
earth from her home within the Western Heaven, while others said that
once, long years before, she had lived in the world as a prince instead
of a princess. However this may be, one thing is certain--Kwan-yin was
pure and good, and well deserved the praises that were showered upon
One day the king called this favourite daughter to the royal bedside,
for he felt that the hour of death was drawing near. Kwan-yin kowtowed
before her royal father, kneeling and touching her forehead on the floor
in sign of deepest reverence. The old man bade her rise and come closer.
Taking her hand tenderly in his own, he said, "Daughter, you know well
how I love you. Your modesty and virtue, your talent and your love of
knowledge, have made you first in my heart. As you know already, I chose
you as heir to my kingdom long ago. I promised that your husband should
be made ruler in my stead. The time is almost ripe for me to ascend upon
the dragon and become a guest on high. It is necessary that you be given
at once in marriage."
"But, most exalted father," faltered the princess, "I am not ready to be
married."
"Not ready, child! Why, are you not eighteen? Are not the daughters of
our nation often wedded long before they reach that age? Because of your
desire for learning I have spared you thus far from any thought of a
husband, but now we can wait no longer."
"Royal father, hear your child, and do not compel her to give up her
dearest pleasures. Let her go into a quiet convent where she may lead
a life of study!"
The king sighed deeply at hearing these words. He loved his daughter and
did not wish to wound her. "Kwan-yin," he continued, "do you wish to
pass by the green spring of youth, to give up this mighty kingdom? Do
you wish to enter the doors of a convent where women say farewell to
life and all its pleasures? No! your father will not permit this. It
grieves me sorely to disappoint you, but one month from this very day
you shall be married. I have chosen for your royal partner a man of many
noble parts. You know him by name already, although you have not seen
him. Remember that, of the hundred virtues filial conduct is the chief,
and that you owe more to me than to all else on earth."
Kwan-yin turned pale. Trembling, she would have sunk to the floor, but
her mother and sisters supported her, and by their tender care brought
her back to consciousness.
Every day of the month that followed, Kwan-yin's relatives begged her to
give up what they called her foolish notion. Her sisters had long since
given up hope of becoming queen. They were amazed at her stupidity. The
very thought of any one's choosing a convent instead of a throne was to
them a sure sign of madness. Over and over again they asked her reason
for making so strange a choice. To every question, she shook her head,
replying, "A voice from the heavens speaks to me, and I must obey it."
On the eve of the wedding day Kwan-yin slipped out of the palace, and,
after a weary journey, arrived at a convent called, "The Cloister of the
White Sparrow." She was dressed as a poor maiden. She said she wished to
become a nun. The abbess, not knowing who she was, did not receive her
kindly. Indeed, she told Kwan-yin that they could not receive her into
the sisterhood, that the building was full. Finally, after Kwan-yin had
shed many tears, the abbess let her enter, but only as a sort of
servant, who might be cast out for the slightest fault.
Now that Kwan-yin found herself in the life which she had long dreamt
of leading, she tried to be satisfied. But the nuns seemed to wish to
make her stay among them most miserable. They gave her the hardest tasks
to do, and it was seldom that she had a minute to rest. All day long
she was busy, carrying water from a well at the foot of the convent hill
or gathering wood from a neighbouring forest. At night when her back
was almost breaking, she was given many extra tasks, enough to have
crushed the spirit of any other woman than this brave daughter of
a king. Forgetting her grief, and trying to hide the lines of pain
that sometimes wrinkled her fair forehead, she tried to make these
hard-hearted women love her. In return for their rough words, she
spoke to them kindly, and never did she give way to anger.
One day while poor Kwan-yin was picking up brushwood in the forest she
heard a tiger making his way through the bushes. Having no means of
defending herself, she breathed a silent prayer to the gods for help,
and calmly awaited the coming of the great beast. To her surprise, when
the bloodthirsty animal appeared, instead of bounding up to tear her in
pieces, he began to make a soft purring noise. He did not try to hurt
Kwan-yin, but rubbed against her in a friendly manner, and let her pat
him on the head.
[Illustration: "ALL DAY SHE WAS BUSY CARRYING WATER."]
The next day the princess went back to the same spot. There she found
no fewer than a dozen savage beasts working under the command of the
friendly tiger, gathering wood for her. In a short time enough brush and
firewood had been piled up to last the convent for six months. Thus,
even the wild animals of the forest were better able to judge of her
goodness than the women of the sisterhood.
At another time when Kwan-yin was toiling up the hill for the twentieth
time, carrying two great pails of water on a pole, an enormous dragon
faced her in the road. Now, in China, the dragon is sacred, and Kwan-yin
was not at all frightened, for she knew that she had done no wrong.
The animal looked at her for a moment, switched its horrid tail, and
shot out fire from its nostrils. Then, dashing the burden from the
startled maiden's shoulder, it vanished. Full of fear, Kwan-yin hurried
up the hill to the nunnery. As she drew near the inner court, she was
amazed to see in the centre of the open space a new building of solid
stone. It had sprung up by magic since her last journey down the hill.
On going forward, she saw that there were four arched doorways to the
fairy house. Above the door facing west was a tablet with these words
written on it: "In honour of Kwan-yin, the faithful princess." Inside
was a well of the purest water, while, for drawing this water, there a
strange machine, the like of which neither Kwan-yin nor the nuns had
ever seen.
The sisters knew that this magic well was a monument to Kwan-yin's
goodness. For a few days they treated her much better. "Since the gods
have dug a well at our very gate," they said, "this girl will no longer
need to bear water from the foot of the hill. For what strange reason,
however, did the gods write this beggar's name on the stone?"
Kwan-yin heard their unkind remarks in silence. She could have explained
the meaning of the dragon's gift, but she chose to let her companions
remain in ignorance. At last the selfish nuns began to grow careless
again, and treated her even worse than before. They could not bear to
see the poor girl enjoy a moment's idleness.
"This is a place for work," they told her. "All of us have laboured hard
to win our present station. You must do likewise." So they robbed her of
every chance for study and prayer, and gave her no credit for the magic
well.
One night the sisters were awakened from their sleep by strange noises,
and soon they heard outside the walls of the compound the blare of a
trumpet. A great army had been sent by Kwan-yin's father to attack the
convent, for his spies had at last been able to trace the runaway
princess to this holy retreat.
"Oh, who has brought this woe upon us?" exclaimed all the women, looking
at each other in great fear. "Who has done this great evil? There is one
among us who has sinned most terribly, and now the gods are about to
destroy us." They gazed at one another, but no one thought of Kwan-yin,
for they did not believe her of enough importance to attract the anger
of heaven, even though she might have done the most shocking of deeds.
Then, too, she had been so meek and lowly while in their holy order that
they did not once dream of charging her with any crime.
The threatening sounds outside grew louder and louder. All at once a
fearful cry arose among the women: "They are about to burn our sacred
dwelling." Smoke was rising just beyond the enclosure where the soldiers
were kindling a great fire, the heat of which would soon be great enough
to make the convent walls crumble into dust.
Suddenly a voice was heard above the tumult of the weeping sisters:
"Alas! I am the cause of all this trouble."
The nuns, turning in amazement, saw that it was Kwan-yin who was
speaking. "You?" they exclaimed, astounded.
"Yes, I, for I am indeed the daughter of a king. My father did not wish
me to take the vows of this holy order. I fled from the palace. He has
sent his army here to burn these buildings and to drag me back a
prisoner."
"Then, see what you have brought upon us, miserable girl!" exclaimed the
abbess. "See how you have repaid our kindness! Our buildings will be
burned above our heads! How wretched you have made us! May heaven's
curses rest upon you!"
"No, no!" exclaimed Kwan-yin, springing up, and trying to keep the
abbess from speaking these frightful words. "You have no right to say
that, for I am innocent of evil. But, wait! You shall soon see whose
prayers the gods will answer, yours or mine!" So saying, she pressed her
forehead to the floor, praying the almighty powers to save the convent
and the sisters.
Outside the crackling of the greedy flames could already be heard. The
fire king would soon destroy every building on that hill-top. Mad with
terror, the sisters prepared to leave the compound and give up all their
belongings to the cruel flames and still more cruel soldiers. Kwan-yin
alone remained in the room, praying earnestly for help.
Suddenly a soft breeze sprang up from the neighbouring forest, dark
clouds gathered overhead, and, although it was the dry season a
drenching shower descended on the flames. Within five minutes the fire
was put out and the convent was saved. Just as the shivering nuns were
thanking Kwan-yin for the divine help she had brought them, two soldiers
who had scaled the outer wall of the compound came in and roughly asked
for the princess.
The trembling girl, knowing that these men were obeying her father's
orders, poured out a prayer to the gods, and straightway made herself
known. They dragged her from the presence of the nuns who had just begun
to love her. Thus disgraced before her father's army, she was taken to
the capital.
On the morrow, she was led before the old king. The father gazed sadly
at his daughter, and then the stern look of a judge hardened his face as
he beckoned the guards to bring her forward.
From a neighbouring room came the sounds of sweet music. A feast was
being served there amid great splendour. The loud laughter of the guests
reached the ears of the young girl as she bowed in disgrace before her
father's throne. She knew that this feast had been prepared for her, and
that her father was willing to give her one more chance.
"Girl," said the king, at last regaining his voice, "in leaving the
royal palace on the eve of your wedding day, not only did you insult
your father, but your king. For this act you deserve to die. However,
because of the excellent record you had made for yourself before you ran
away, I have decided to give you one more chance to redeem yourself.
Refuse me, and the penalty is death: obey me, and all may yet be
well--the kingdom that you spurned is still yours for the asking. All
that I require is your marriage to the man whom I have chosen."
"And when, most august King, would you have me decide?" asked Kwan-yin
earnestly.
"This very day, this very hour, this very moment," he answered sternly.
"What! would you hesitate between love upon a throne and death? Speak,
my daughter, tell me that you love me and will do my bidding!"
It was now all that Kwan-yin could do to keep from throwing herself at
her father's feet and yielding to his wishes, not because he offered her
a kingdom, but because she loved him and would gladly have made him
happy. But her strong will kept her from relenting. No power on earth
could have stayed her from doing what she thought her duty.
"Beloved father," she answered sadly, and her voice was full of
tenderness, "it is not a question of my love for you--of that there is
no question, for all my life I have shown it in every action. Believe
me, if I were free to do your bidding, gladly would I make you happy,
but a voice from the gods has spoken, has commanded that I remain a
virgin, that I devote my life to deeds of mercy. When heaven itself has
commanded, what can even a princess do but listen to that power which
rules the earth?"
The old king was far from satisfied with Kwan-yin's answer. He grew
furious, his thin wrinkled skin turned purple as the hot blood rose to
his head. "Then you refuse to do my bidding! Take her, men! Give to her
the death that is due to a traitor to the king!" As they bore Kwan-yin
away from his presence the white-haired monarch fell, swooning, from his
chair.
That night, when Kwan-yin was put to death, she descended into the lower
world of torture. No sooner had she set foot in that dark country of the
dead than the vast region of endless punishment suddenly blossomed forth
and became like the gardens of Paradise. Pure white lilies sprang up on
every side, and the odour of a million flowers filled all the rooms and
corridors. King Yama, ruler of the dominion, rushed forth to learn the
cause of this wonderful change. No sooner did his eyes rest upon the
fair young face of Kwan-yin than he saw in her the emblem of a purity
which deserved no home but heaven.
"Beautiful virgin, doer of many mercies," he began, after addressing
her by her title, "I beg you in the name of justice to depart from this
bloody kingdom. It is not right that the fairest flower of heaven should
enter and shed her fragrance in these halls. Guilt must suffer here, and
sin find no reward. Depart thou, then, from my dominion. The peach of
immortal life shall be bestowed upon you, and heaven alone shall be your
dwelling place."
Thus Kwan-yin became the Goddess of Mercy; thus she entered into that
glad abode, surpassing all earthly kings and queens. And ever since that
time, on account of her exceeding goodness, thousands of poor people
breathe out to her each year their prayers for mercy. There is no fear
in their gaze as they look at her beautiful image, for their eyes are
filled with tears of love.
THE TWO JUGGLERS
One beautiful spring day two men strolled into the public square of
a well-known Chinese city. They were plainly dressed and looked like
ordinary countrymen who had come in to see the sights. Judging by their
faces, they were father and son. The elder, a wrinkled man of perhaps
fifty, wore a scant grey beard. The younger had a small box on his
shoulder.
At the hour when these strangers entered the public square, a large
crowd had gathered, for it was a feast day, and every one was bent on
having a good time. All the people seemed very happy. Some, seated in
little open-air booths, were eating, drinking, and smoking. Others were
buying odds and ends from the street-vendors, tossing coins, and playing
various games of chance.
The two men walked about aimlessly. They seemed to have no friends among
the pleasure-seekers. At last, however, as they stood reading a public
notice posted at the entrance of the town-hall or yamen, a bystander
asked them who they were.
"Oh, we are jugglers from a distant province," said the elder, smiling
and pointing towards the box. "We can do many tricks for the amusement
of the people."
Soon it was spread about among the crowd that two famous jugglers had
just arrived from the capital, and that they were able to perform many
wonderful deeds. Now it happened that the mandarin or mayor of the city,
at that very moment was entertaining a number of guests in the yamen.
They had just finished eating, and the host was wondering what he should
do to amuse his friends, when a servant told him of the jugglers.
"Ask them what they can do," said the mandarin eagerly. "I will pay them
well if they can really amuse us, but I want something more than the old
tricks of knife-throwing and balancing. They must show us something
new."
The servant went outside and spoke to the jugglers: "The great man bids
you tell him what you can do. If you can amuse his visitors he will
bring them out to the private grand stand, and let you perform before
them and the people who are gathered together."
"Tell your honourable master," said the elder, whom we shall call Chang,
"that, try us as he will, he will not be disappointed. Tell him that we
come from the unknown land of dreams and visions, that we can turn rocks
into mountains, rivers into oceans, mice into elephants, in short, that
there is nothing in magic too difficult for us to do."
The official was delighted when he heard the report of his servant.
"Now we may have a little fun," he said to his guests, "for there are
jugglers outside who will perform their wonderful tricks before us."
The guests filed out on to the grand stand at one side of the public
square. The mandarin commanded that a rope should be stretched across
so as to leave an open space in full view of the crowd, where the two
Changs might give their exhibition.
For a time the two strangers entertained the people with some of the
simpler tricks, such as spinning plates in the air, tossing bowls up and
catching them on chopsticks, making flowers grow from empty pots, and
transforming one object into another. At last, however, the mandarin
cried out: "These tricks are very good of their kind, but how about
those idle boasts of changing rivers into oceans and mice into
elephants? Did you not say that you came from the land of dreams? These
tricks you have done are stale and shopworn. Have you nothing new with
which to regale my guests on this holiday?"
"Most certainly, your excellency. But surely you would not have a
labourer do more than his employer requires? Would that not be quite
contrary to the teachings of our fathers? Be assured, sir, anything that
you demand I can do for you. Only say the word."
The mandarin laughed outright at this boasting language. "Take care, my
man! Do not go too far with your promises. There are too many impostors
around for me to believe every stranger. Hark you! no lying, for if you
lie in the presence of my guests, I shall take great pleasure in having
you beaten."
"My words are quite true, your excellency," repeated Chang earnestly.
"What have we to gain by deceit, we who have performed our miracles
before the countless hosts of yonder Western Heaven?"
"Ha, ha! hear the braggarts!" shouted the guests. "What shall we command
them to do?"
For a moment they consulted together, whispering and laughing.
"I have it," cried the host finally. "Our feast was short of fruit,
since this is the off season. Suppose we let this fellow supply us.
Here, fellow, produce us a peach, and be quick about it. We have no time
for fooling."
"What, masters, a peach?" exclaimed the elder Chang in mock dismay.
"Surely at this season you do not expect a peach."
"Caught at his own game," laughed the guests, and the people began to
hoot derisively.
"But, father, you promised to do anything he required," urged the son.
"If he asks even a peach, how can you refuse and at the same time save
your face?"
"Hear the boy talk," mumbled the father, "and yet, perhaps he's right.
Very well, masters," turning to the crowd, "if it's a peach you want,
why, a peach you shall have, even though I must send into the garden of
the Western Heaven for the fruit."
The people became silent and the mandarin's guests forgot to laugh. The
old man, still muttering, opened the box from which he had been taking
the magic bowls, plates, and other articles. "To think of people wanting
peaches at this season! What is the world coming to?"
After fumbling in the box for some moments he drew out a skein of golden
thread, fine spun and as light as gossamer. No sooner had he unwound a
portion of this thread than a sudden gust of wind carried it up into the
air above the heads of the onlookers. Faster and faster the old man
paid out the magic coil, higher and higher the free end rose into the
heavens, until, strain his eyes as he would, no one present could see
into what far-region it had vanished.
"Wonderful, wonderful!" shouted the people with one voice, "the old man
is a fairy."
For a moment they forgot all about the mandarin, the jugglers, and the
peach, so amazed were they at beholding the flight of the magic thread.
At last the old man seemed satisfied with the distance to which his cord
had sailed, and, with a bow to the spectators, he tied the end to a
large wooden pillar which helped to support the roof of the grand stand.
For a moment the structure trembled and swayed as if it too would be
carried off into the blue ether, the guests turned pale and clutched
their chairs for support, but not even the mandarin dared to speak, so
sure were they now that they were in the presence of fairies.
"Everything is ready for the journey," said old Chang calmly.
"What! shall you leave us?" asked the mayor, finding his voice again.
"I? Oh, no, my old bones are not spry enough for quick climbing. My son
here will bring us the magic peach. He is handsome and active enough to
enter that heavenly garden. Graceful, oh graceful is that peach tree--of
course, you remember the line from the poem--and a graceful man must
pluck the fruit."
The mandarin was still more surprised at the juggler's knowledge of a
famous poem from the classics. It made him and his friends all the more
certain that the newcomers were indeed fairies.
The young man at a sign from his father tightened his belt and the bands
about his ankles, and then, with a graceful gesture to the astonished
people, sprang upon the magic string, balanced himself for a moment on
the steep incline, and then ran as nimbly up as a sailor would have
mounted a rope ladder. Higher and higher he climbed till he seemed no
bigger than a lark ascending into the blue sky, and then, like some tiny
speck, far, far away, on the western horizon.
The people gazed in open-mouthed wonder. They were struck dumb and
filled with some nameless fear; they hardly dared to look at the
enchanter who stood calmly in their midst, smoking his long-stemmed
pipe.
The mandarin, ashamed of having laughed at and threatened this man
who was clearly a fairy, did not know what to say. He snapped his long
finger nails and looked at his guests in mute astonishment. The visitors
silently drank their tea, and the crowd of sightseers craned their necks
in a vain effort to catch sight of the vanished fairy. Only one in all
that assembly, a bright-eyed little boy of eight, dared to break the
silence, and he caused a hearty burst of merriment by crying out, "Oh,
daddy, will the bad young man fly off into the sky and leave his poor
father all alone?"
The greybeard laughed loudly with the others, and tossed the lad a
copper. "Ah, the good boy," he said smiling, "he has been well trained
to love his father; no fear of foreign ways spoiling his filial piety."
After a few moments of waiting, old Chang laid aside his pipe and fixed
his eyes once more on the western sky. "It is coming," he said quietly.
"The peach will soon be here."
[Illustration: "HIGHER AND HIGHER HE CLIMBED."]
Suddenly he held out his hand as if to catch some falling object, but,
look as they would, the people could see nothing. Swish! thud! it came
like a streak of light, and, lo, there in the magician's fingers was a
peach, the most beautiful specimen the people had ever seen, large and
rosy. "Straight from the garden of the gods," said Chang, handing the
fruit to the mandarin, "a peach in the Second Moon, and the snow hardly
off the ground."
Trembling with excitement, the official took the peach and cut it open.
It was large enough for all his guests to have a taste, and such a taste
it was! They smacked their lips and wished for more, secretly thinking
that never again would ordinary fruit be worth the eating.
But all this time the old juggler, magician, fairy or whatever you
choose to call him, was looking anxiously into the sky. The result of
this trick was more than he had bargained for. True, he had been able to
produce the magic peach which the mandarin had called for, but his son,
where was his son? He shaded his eyes and looked far up into the blue
heavens, and so did the people, but no one could catch a glimpse of the
departed youth.
"Oh, my son, my son," cried the old man in despair, "how cruel is the
fate that has robbed me of you, the only prop of my declining years! Oh,
my boy, my boy, would that I had not sent you on so perilous a journey!
Who now will look after my grave when I am gone?"
Suddenly the silken cord on which the young man had sped so daringly
into the sky, gave a quick jerk which almost toppled over the post to
which it was tied, and there, before the very eyes of the people, it
fell from the lofty height, a silken pile on the ground in front of
The greybeard uttered a loud cry and covered his face with his hands.
"Alas! the whole story is plain enough," he sobbed. "My boy was caught
in the act of plucking the magic peach from the garden of the gods, and
they have thrown him into prison. Woe is me! Ah! woe is me!"
The mandarin and his friends were deeply touched by the old man's grief,
and tried in vain to comfort him. "Perhaps he will return," they said.
"Have courage!"
"Yes, but in what a shape?" replied the magician. "See! even now they
are restoring him to his father."
The people looked, and they saw twirling and twisting through the air
the young man's arm. It fell upon the ground in front of them at the
fairy's feet. Next came the head, a leg, the body. One by one before the
gasping, shuddering people, the parts of the unfortunate young man were
restored to his father.
After the first outburst of wild, frantic grief the old man by a great
effort gained control of his feelings, and began to gather up these
parts, putting them tenderly into the wooden box.
By this time many of the spectators were weeping at the sight of the
father's affliction. "Come," said the mandarin at last, deeply moved,
"let us present the old man with sufficient money to give his boy a
decent burial."
All present agreed willingly, for there is no sight in China that causes
greater pity than that of an aged parent robbed by death of an only son.
The copper cash fell in a shower at the juggler's feet, and soon tears
of gratitude were mingled with those of sorrow. He gathered up the money
and tied it in a large black cloth. Then a wonderful change came over
his face. He seemed all of a sudden to forget his grief. Turning to the
box, he raised the lid. The people heard him say: "Come, my son; the
crowd is waiting for you to thank them. Hurry up! They have been very
kind to us."
In an instant the box was thrown open with a bang, and before the
mandarin and his friends, before the eyes of all the sightseers the
young man, strong and whole once more, stepped forth and bowed, clasping
his hands and giving the national salute.
For a moment all were silent. Then, as the wonder of the whole thing
dawned upon them, the people broke forth into a tumult of shouts,
laughter, and compliments. "The fairies have surely come to visit us!"
they shouted. "The city will be blessed with good fortune! Perhaps it is
Fairy Old Boy himself who is among us!"
The mandarin rose and addressed the jugglers, thanking them in the name
of the city for their visit and for the taste they had given to him and
his guests of the peach from the heavenly orchard.
Even as he spoke, the magic box opened again; the two fairies
disappeared inside, the lid closed, and the chest rose from the ground
above the heads of the people. For a moment it floated round in a circle
like some homing pigeon trying to find its bearings before starting on
a return journey. Then, with a sudden burst of speed, it shot off into
the heavens and vanished from the sight of those below, and not a thing
remained as proof of the strange visitors except the magic peach seed
that lay beside the teacups on the mandarin's table.
According to the most ancient writings there is now nothing left to tell
of this story. It has been declared, however, by later scholars that the
official and his friends who had eaten the magic peach, at once began to
feel a change in their lives. While, before the coming of the fairies,
they had lived unfairly, accepting bribes and taking part in many
shameful practices, now, after tasting of the heavenly fruit, they began
to grow better. The people soon began to honour and love them, saying,
"Surely these great men are not like others of their kind, for these men
are just and honest in their dealings with us. They seem not to be
ruling for their own reward!"
However this may be, we do know that before many years their city became
the centre of the greatest peach-growing section of China, and even
yet when strangers walk in the orchards and look up admiringly at the
beautiful sweet-smelling fruit, the natives sometimes ask proudly, "And
have you never heard about the wonderful peach which was the beginning
of all our orchards, the magic peach the fairies brought us from the
Western Heaven?"
THE PHANTOM VESSEL
Once a ship loaded with pleasure-seekers was sailing from North China
to Shanghai. High winds and stormy weather had delayed her, and she was
still one week from port when a great plague broke out on board. This
plague was of the worst kind. It attacked passengers and sailors alike
until there were so few left to sail the vessel that it seemed as if she
would soon be left to the mercy of winds and waves.
On all sides lay the dead, and the groans of the dying were most
terrible to hear. Of that great company of travellers only one, a
little boy named Ying-lo, had escaped. At last the few sailors, who
had been trying hard to save their ship, were obliged to lie down upon
the deck, a prey to the dreadful sickness, and soon they too were
dead.
Ying-lo now found himself alone on the sea. For some reason--he did not
know why--the gods or the sea fairies had spared him, but as he looked
about in terror at the friends and loved ones who had died, he almost
wished that he might join them.
The sails flapped about like great broken wings, while the giant waves
dashed higher above the deck, washing many of the bodies overboard and
wetting the little boy to the skin. Shivering with cold, he gave himself
up for lost and prayed to the gods, whom his mother had often told him
about, to take him from this dreadful ship and let him escape the fatal
illness.
As he lay there praying he heard a slight noise in the rigging just
above his head. Looking up, he saw a ball of fire running along a
yardarm near the top of the mast. The sight was so strange that he
forgot his prayer and stared with open-mouthed wonder. To his
astonishment, the ball grew brighter and brighter, and then suddenly
began slipping down the mast, all the time increasing in size. The poor
boy did not know what to do or to think. Were the gods, in answer to his
prayer, sending fire to burn the vessel? If so, he would soon escape.
Anything would be better than to be alone upon the sea.
Nearer and nearer came the fireball. At last, when it reached the deck,
to Ying-lo's surprise, something very, very strange happened. Before he
had time to feel alarmed, the light vanished, and a funny little man
stood in front of him peering anxiously into the child's frightened
"Yes, you are the lad I'm looking for," he said at last, speaking in a
piping voice that almost made Ying-lo smile. "You are Ying-lo, and you
are the only one left of this wretched company." This he said, pointing
towards the bodies lying here and there about the deck.
Although he saw that the old man meant him no harm, the child could say
nothing, but waited in silence, wondering what would happen next.
By this time the vessel was tossing and pitching so violently that it
seemed every minute as if it would upset and go down beneath the foaming
waves, never to rise again. Not many miles distant on the right, some
jagged rocks stuck out of the water, lifting their cruel heads as if
waiting for the helpless ship.
The newcomer walked slowly towards the mast and tapped on it three times
with an iron staff he had been using as a cane. Immediately the sails
spread, the vessel righted itself and began to glide over the sea so
fast that the gulls were soon left far behind, while the threatening
rocks upon which the ship had been so nearly dashed seemed like specks
in the distance.
"Do you remember me?" said the stranger, suddenly turning and coming up
to Ying-lo, but his voice was lost in the whistling of the wind, and the
boy knew only by the moving of his lips that the old man was talking.
The greybeard bent over until his mouth was at Ying-lo's ear: "Did you
ever see me before?"
With a puzzled look, at first the child shook his head. Then as he gazed
more closely there seemed to be something that he recognized about the
wrinkled face. "Yes, I think so, but I don't know when."
With a tap of his staff the fairy stopped the blowing of the wind, and
then spoke once more to his small companion: "One year ago I passed
through your village. I was dressed in rags, and was begging my way
along the street, trying to find some one who would feel sorry for me.
Alas! no one answered my cry for mercy. Not a crust was thrown into my
bowl. All the people were deaf, and fierce dogs drove me from door to
door. Finally when I was almost dying of hunger, I began to feel that
here was a village without one good person in it. Just then you saw my
suffering, ran into the house, and brought me out food. Your heartless
mother saw you doing this and beat you cruelly. Do you remember now, my
"Yes, I remember," he answered sadly, "and that mother is now lying
dead. Alas! all, all are dead, my father and my brothers also. Not one
is left of my family."
"Little did you know, my boy, to whom you were giving food that day.
You took me for a lowly beggar, but, behold, it was not a poor man that
you fed, for I am Iron Staff. You must have heard of me when they were
telling of the fairies in the Western Heaven, and of their adventures
here on earth."
"Yes, yes," answered Ying-lo, trembling half with fear and half with
joy, "indeed I have heard of you many, many times, and all the people
love you for your kind deeds of mercy."
"Alas! they did not show their love, my little one. Surely you know that
if any one wishes to reward the fairies for their mercies, he must begin
to do deeds of the same kind himself. No one but you in all your village
had pity on me in my rags. If they had known that I was Iron Staff,
everything would have been different; they would have given me a feast
and begged for my protection.
  "The only love that loves aright
   Is that which loves in every plight.
   The beggar in his sad array
   Is moulded of the selfsame clay.
  "Who knows a man by what he wears,
   By what he says or by his prayers?
   Hidden beneath that wrinkled skin
   A fairy may reside within.
  "Then treat with kindness and with love
   The lowly man, the god above;
   A friendly nod, a welcome smile--
   For love is ever worth the while."
Ying-lo listened in wonder to Iron Staff's little poem, and when he had
finished, the boy's face was glowing with the love of which the fairy
had spoken. "My poor, poor father and mother!" he cried; "they knew
nothing of these beautiful things you are telling me. They were brought
up in poverty. As they were knocked about in childhood by those around
them, so they learned to beat others who begged them for help. Is it
strange that they did not have hearts full of pity for you when you
looked like a beggar?"
"But what about you, my boy? You were not deaf when I asked you. Have
you not been whipped and punished all your life? How then did you learn
to look with love at those in tears?"
The child could not answer these questions, but only looked sorrowfully
at Iron Staff. "Oh, can you not, good fairy, will you not restore my
parents and brothers, and give them another chance to be good and useful
people?"
"Listen, Ying-lo; it is impossible--unless you do two things first," he
answered, stroking his beard gravely and leaning heavily upon his staff.
"What are they? What must I do to save my family? Anything you ask of me
will not be too much to pay for your kindness."
"First you must tell me of some good deed done by these people for whose
lives you are asking. Name only one, for that will be enough; but it is
against our rules to help those who have done nothing."
Ying-lo was silent, and for a moment his face was clouded. "Yes, I
know," he said finally, brightening. "They burned incense once at the
temple. That was certainly a deed of virtue."
"But when was it, little one, that they did this?"
"When my big brother was sick, and they were praying for him to get
well. The doctors could not save him with boiled turnip juice or with
any other of the medicines they used, so my parents begged the gods."
"Selfish, selfish!" muttered Iron Staff. "If their eldest son had not
been dying they would have spent no money at the temple. They tried in
this way to buy back his health, for they were expecting him to support
them in their old age."
Ying-lo's face fell. "You are right," he answered.
"Can you think of nothing else?"
"Yes, oh, yes, last year when the foreigner rode through our village and
fell sick in front of our house, they took him in and cared for him."
"How long?" asked the other sharply.
"Until he died the next week."
"And what did they do with the mule he was riding, his bed, and the
money in his bag? Did they try to restore them to his people?"
"No, they said they'd keep them to pay for the trouble." Ying-lo's face
turned scarlet.
"But try again, dear boy! Is there not one little deed of goodness that
was not selfish? Think once more."
For a long time Ying-lo did not reply. At length he spoke in a low
voice; "I think of one, but I fear it amounts to nothing."
"No good, my child, is too small to be counted when the gods are
weighing a man's heart."
"Last spring the birds were eating in my father's garden. My mother
wanted to buy poison from the shop to destroy them, but my father said
no, that the little things must live, and he for one was not in favour
of killing them."
"At last, Ying-lo, you have named a real deed of mercy, and as he spared
the tiny birds from poison, so shall his life and the lives of your
mother and brothers be restored from the deadly plague.
"But remember there is one other thing that depends on you."
Ying-lo's eyes glistened gratefully. "Then if it rests with me, and I
can do it, you have my promise. No sacrifice should be too great for a
son to make for his loved ones even though his life itself is asked in
"Very well, Ying-lo. What I require is that you carry out to the letter
my instructions. Now it is time for me to keep my promise to you."
So saying, Iron Staff called on Ying-lo to point out the members of his
family, and, approaching them one by one, with the end of his iron stick
he touched their foreheads. In an instant each, without a word, arose.
Looking round and recognising Ying-lo, they stood back, frightened at
seeing him with the fairy. When the last had risen to his feet, Iron
Staff beckoned all of them to listen. This they did willingly, too much
terrified to speak, for they saw on all sides signs of the plague that
had swept over the vessel, and they remembered the frightful agony they
had suffered in dying. Each knew that he had been lifted by some magic
power from darkness into light.
"My friends," began the fairy, "little did you think when less than a
year ago you drove me from your door that soon you yourselves would be
in need of mercy. To-day you have had a peep into the awful land of
Yama. You have seen the horror of his tortures, have heard the screams
of his slaves, and by another night you would have been carried before
him to be judged. What power is it that has saved you from his clutches?
As you look back through your wicked lives can you think of any reason
why you deserved this rescue? No, there is no memory of goodness in
your black hearts. Well, I shall tell you: it is this little boy, this
Ying-lo, who many times has felt the weight of your wicked hands and
has hidden in terror at your coming. To him alone you owe my help."
Father, mother, and brothers all gazed in turn, first at the fairy and
then at the timid child whose eyes fell before their looks of gratitude.
"By reason of his goodness this child whom you have scorned is worthy of
a place within the Western Heaven. In truth, I came this very day to
lead him to that fairyland. For you, however, he wishes to make a
sacrifice. With sorrow I am yielding to his wishes. His sacrifice will
be that of giving up a place among the fairies and of continuing to live
here on this earth with you. He will try to make a change within your
household. If at any time you treat him badly and do not heed his
wishes--mark you well my words--by the power of this magic staff which I
shall place in his hands, he may enter at once into the land of the
fairies, leaving you to die in your wickedness. This I command him to
do, and he has promised to obey my slightest wish.
"This plague took you off suddenly and ended your wicked lives. Ying-lo
has raised you from its grasp and his power can lift you from the bed of
sin. No other hand than his can bear the rod which I am leaving. If one
of you but touch it, instantly he will fall dead upon the ground.
"And now, my child, the time has come for me to leave you. First,
however, I must show you what you are now able to do. Around you lie the
corpses of sailors and passengers. Tap three times upon the mast and
wish that they shall come to life," So saying he handed Ying-lo the iron
staff.
Although the magic rod was heavy, the child lifted it as if it were a
fairy's wand. Then, stepping forward to the mast, he rapped three times
as he had been commanded. Immediately on all sides arose the bodies,
once more full of life and strength.
"Now command the ship to take you back to your home port, for such
sinful creatures as these are in no way fit to make a journey among
strangers. They must first return and free their homes of sin."
Again rapping on the mast, the child willed the great vessel to take
its homeward course. No sooner had he moved the staff than, like a bird
wheeling in the heavens, the bark swung round and started on the return
journey. Swifter than a flash of lightning flew the boat, for it was
now become a fairy vessel. Before the sailors and the travellers could
recover from their surprise, land was sighted and they saw that they
were indeed entering the harbour.
Just as the ship was darting toward the shore the fairy suddenly, with
a parting word to Ying-lo, changed into a flaming ball of fire which
rolled along the deck and ascended the spars. Then, as it reached the
top of the rigging, it floated off into the blue sky, and all on board,
speechless with surprise, watched it until it vanished.
With a cry of thanksgiving, Ying-lo flung his arms about his parents and
descended with them to the shore.
THE WOODEN TABLET
"Yes, my boy, whatever happens, be sure to save that tablet. It is the
only thing we have left worth keeping."
K'ang-p'u's father was just setting out for the city, to be gone all
day. He had been telling K'ang-p'u about some work in the little garden,
for the boy was a strong and willing helper.
"All right, father, I'll do what you tell me; but suppose the foreign
soldiers should come while you are gone? I heard that they were over at
T'ang Shu yesterday and burned the village. If they should come here,
what must I do?"
Mr. Lin laughed heartily. "Why, there's nothing here for them to burn,
if it comes to that!--a mud house, a grass roof, and a pile of ragged
bedding. Surely they won't bother my little hut. It's loot they're
after--money--or something they can sell."
"But, father," persisted the boy, "haven't you forgotten? Surely you
wouldn't wish them to burn your father's tablet?"
"Quite right; for the moment I did forget. Yes, yes, my boy, whatever
happens be sure to save the tablet. It is the only thing we have worth
keeping."
With that, Mr. Lin went out at the gate, leaving K'ang-p'u standing all
alone. The little fellow was scarcely twelve years old. He had a bright,
sunny face and a happy heart. Being left by himself did not mean tears
and idleness for him.
He went into the poor little house and stood for a moment looking
earnestly at the wooden tablet. It was on a shelf in the one-roomed
shanty, an oblong piece of wood about twelve inches high, enclosed in
a wooden case. Through the carved screen work in the front, K'ang-p'u
could see his grandfather's name written in Chinese characters on the
tablet. Ever since babyhood K'ang-p'u had been taught to look at this
piece of wood with a feeling of reverence.
"Your grandfather's spirit is inside," his father had said one day. "You
must worship his spirit, for he was a good man, far better than your
dad. If I had obeyed him in all things, I, his only son, should not now
be living in this miserable hut."
"But didn't he live here, too?" asked K'ang-p'u in surprise.
"Oh, no, we lived in a big house over yonder in another village; in a
big house with a high stone wall."
The little fellow had gasped with surprise at hearing this, for there
was not such a thing as a stone wall in his village, and he felt that
his grandfather must have been a rich man. He had not asked any more
questions, but from that day on he had been rather afraid of the carved
wooden box in which his grandfather's spirit was supposed to live.
So, on this day when his father left him alone, the boy stood looking at
the tablet, wondering how a big man's spirit could squeeze into such a
small space. He put out his finger cautiously and touched the bottom of
the box, then drew back, half-frightened at his own daring. No bad
results followed. It seemed just like any other piece of wood. Somewhat
puzzled, he walked out of the house into the little garden. His father
had told him to re-set some young cabbages. This was work which
K'ang-p'u had done many times before. First, he gathered a basket of
chicken feathers, for his father had told him that a few feathers placed
at the roots of the young plant would do more to make it strong and
healthy than anything else that could be used.
All day K'ang-p'u worked steadily in the garden. He was just beginning
to feel tired, when he heard a woman screaming in the distance. He
dropped his basket and rushed to the gate. Down the road at the far
side of the village he saw a crowd of women and children running hither
and thither, and--yes! there were the soldiers--the dreaded foreign
soldiers! They were burning the houses; they were stealing whatever they
could find.
Now, most boys would have been frightened--would have taken to their
heels without thought of consequences. K'ang-p'u, however, though
like other lads afraid of soldiers, was too brave to run without first
doing his duty. He decided to stand his ground until he was sure the
foreigners were coming his way. Perhaps they would grow tired of their
cruel sport and leave the little house unharmed. He watched with
wide-open eyes the work of pillage. Alas! these men did not seem to
tire of their amusement. One after another the houses were entered and
robbed. Women were screaming and children crying. Nearly all the village
men were away in a distant market town, for none of them had expected
an attack.
Nearer and nearer came the robbers. At last they were next door to
K'ang-p'u's hut, and he knew the time had come for him to do his duty.
Seizing the basket of chicken feathers, he rushed into the house,
snatched the precious tablet from the shelf, and hid it in the bottom of
the basket. Then, without stopping to say good-bye to the spot which he
had known all his life, he rushed out of the gate and down the narrow
street.
"Kill the kid!" shouted a soldier, whom K'ang-p'u nearly ran against in
his hurry. "Put down the basket, boy! No stealing here."
"Yes, kill him!" shouted another with a loud laugh; "he'd make a good
bit of bacon."
But no one touched him, and K'ang-p'u, still holding tightly to his
burden, was soon far out on the winding road among the cornfields. If
they should follow, he thought of hiding among the giant cornstalks. His
legs were tired now, and he sat down under a stone memorial arch near
some crossroads to rest.
Where was he going, and what should he do? These were the questions that
filled the boy's whirling little brain. First, he must find out if the
soldiers were really destroying all the houses in his village. Perhaps
some of them would not be burned and he could return at night to join
After several failures he managed to climb one of the stone pillars and
from the arch above he could get a good view of the surrounding country.
Over to the west was his village. His heart beat fast when he saw that
a great cloud of smoke was rising from the houses. Clearly, the thieves
were making quick work of the place, and soon there would be nothing
left but piles of mud, brick, ashes and other rubbish.
Night came on. K'ang-p'u clambered down from his stone perch. He was
beginning to feel hungry, and yet he dared not turn back towards home.
And besides, would not all the other villagers be hungry, too? He lay
down at the foot of the stone monument, placing the basket within reach
at one side. Soon he fell fast asleep.
How long he had been sleeping he never knew; but it was not yet day when
he awoke with a start and looked round him in the moonlight. Some one
had called him distinctly by name. At first, he thought it must have
been his father's voice; and then as he grew wider and wider awake he
knew this could not be, for the voice sounded like that of an old man.
K'ang-p'u looked round in amazement, first at the stone columns, then
at the arch above. No one was to be seen. Had he been dreaming?
Just as he lay back to sleep once more, the voice sounded again very
faintly, "K'ang-p'u! K'ang-p'u! why don't you let me out? I can't
breathe under all these feathers."
Quick as a flash he knew what was the matter. Burying his hand in the
basket, he seized the wooden tablet, drew it from its hiding-place, and
stood it up on the stone base. Wonder of wonders! There before his very
eyes he saw a tiny fellow, not six inches high, sitting on top of the
wooden upright and dangling his legs over the front of the tablet. The
dwarf had a long grey beard, and K'ang-p'u, without looking twice, knew
that this was the spirit of his dead grandfather come to life and
clothed with flesh and blood.
"Ho, ho!" said the small man, laughing, "so you thought you'd bury your
old grandfather in feathers, did you? A soft enough grave, but rather
smelly."
"But, sir," cried K'ang-p'u, "I had to do it, to save you from the
soldiers! They were just about to burn our house and you in it."
"There, there, my boy! don't be uneasy. I am not scolding you. You did
the best you could for your old gran'ther. If you had been like most
lads, you would have taken to your heels and left me to those sea-devils
who were sacking the village. There is no doubt about it: you saved me
from a second death much more terrible than the first one."
K'ang-p'u shuddered, for he knew that his grandfather had been killed in
battle. He had heard his father tell the story many times.
"Now, what do you propose doing about it?" asked the old man finally,
looking straight into the boy's face.
"Doing about it, sir? Why, really, I don't know. I thought that perhaps
in the morning the soldiers would be gone and I could carry you back.
Surely my father will be looking for me."
"What! looking for you in the ashes? And what could he do if he did find
you? Your house is burned, your chickens carried away and your cabbages
trampled underfoot. A sorry home he will return to. You would be just
one more mouth to feed. No! that plan will never do. If your father
thinks you are dead, he will go off to another province to get work.
That would save him from starvation."
"But what am I to do?" wailed poor K'ang-p'u. "I don't want him to leave
me all alone!"
"All alone! What! don't you count your old grand-daddy? Surely you are
not a very polite youngster, even if you did save me from burning to
"Count you?" repeated the boy, surprised. "Why, surely you can't help me
to earn a living?"
"Why not, boy? Is this an age when old men are good for nothing?"
"But, sir, you are only the spirit of my grandfather, and spirits
cannot work!"
"Ha, ha! just hear the child. Why, look you, I will show you what
spirits can do, provided you will do exactly what I tell you."
Of course, K'ang-p'u promised, for he was always obedient; and was not
this little man who spoke so strangely, the spirit of his grandfather?
And is not every lad in China taught to honour his ancestors?
"Now, listen, my boy. First, let me say that if you had not been kind,
brave and filial, I should not take the trouble to help you out of your
misfortune. As it is, there is nothing else for me to do. I cast your
father off because he was disobedient. He has lived in a dirty hovel
ever since. Doubtless, he has been sorry for his misdeeds, for I see
that although he was disgraced by being sent away from the family home,
he has taught you to honour and love me. Most boys would have snatched
up a blanket or a piece of bread before running from the enemy, but you
thought only of my tablet. You saved me and went to bed hungry. For this
bravery, I shall give back to you the home of your ancestors."
"But I can't live in it," said K'ang-p'u, full of wonder, "if you will
not let my father come back to it. If he goes away he will have a very
hard time: he will be lonely without me, and may die; and then I would
not be able to take care of his grave, or to burn incense there at the
proper season!"
"Quite right, K'ang-p'u. I see you love your father as well as your
grandfather's tablet. Very well; you shall have your way. I daresay your
father is sorry by this time that he treated me so badly."
"Indeed, he must be," said the boy earnestly, "for I have seen him kneel
before your tablet many times and burn incense there on the proper days.
I know he is very sorry."
"Very well; go to sleep again. Let us wait until morning and then I
shall see what I can do for you. This moonlight is not bright enough for
my old eyes. I shall have to wait for morning."
As he spoke these last words, the little man began to grow smaller and
smaller before the eyes of his grandson, until at last he had altogether
At first, K'ang-p'u was too much excited to close his eyes. He remained
for a time looking up into the starry sky and wondering if what he had
heard would really come true, or whether he could have dreamt the whole
story of his grandfather's coming to life again. Could it really be that
the old family property would be given back to his father? He remembered
now that he had once heard his father speak of having lived in a large
house on a beautiful compound. It was just before K'ang-p'u's mother had
been carried away by the fever. As she had lain tossing upon the rude
stone bed, with none of those comforts which are so necessary for the
sick, K'ang-p'u remembered that his father had said to her: "What a
shame that we are not living in my father's house! There you might have
had every luxury. It is all my fault; I disobeyed my father."
Soon after that his mother had died, but K'ang-p'u had remembered those
words ever since, and had often wished that he could hear more about
this house where his father had spent his boyhood. Could it be possible
that they would soon be living in it? No, surely there must be some
mistake: the night fairies of his dreams had been deceiving him. With
a sigh he closed his eyes and once more fell asleep.
When K'ang-p'u next awoke, the sun was shining full in his face. He
looked around him, sleepily rubbing his eyes and trying to remember
all that had happened. Suddenly he thought of the tablet and of his
grandfather's appearance at midnight. But, strange to say, the basket
had disappeared with all its contents. The tablet was nowhere to be
seen, and even the stone arch under which he had gone to sleep had
completely vanished. Alas! his grandfather's tablet--how poorly he had
guarded it! What terrible thing would happen now that it was gone!
K'ang-p'u stood up and looked round him in trembling surprise. What
could have taken place while he was sleeping? At first, he did not know
what to do. Fortunately, the path through the corn was still there, and
he decided to return to the village and see if he could find any trace
of his father. His talk with the old man must have been only an idle
dream, and some thief must have carried off the basket. If only the
stone arch had not vanished K'ang-p'u would not have been so perplexed.
He hurried along the narrow road, trying to forget the empty stomach
which was beginning to cry for food. If the soldiers were still in the
village, surely they would not hurt an empty-handed little boy. More
than likely they had gone the day before. If he could only find his
father! Now he crossed the little brook where the women came to rub
their clothes upon the rocks. There was the big mulberry tree where the
boys used to gather leaves for their silkworms. Another turn of the road
and he would see the village.
When K'ang-p'u passed round the corner and looked for the ruins of the
village hovels, an amazing sight met his gaze. There, rising directly
before him, was a great stone wall, like those he had seen round the
rich people's houses when his father had taken him to the city. The
great gate stood wide open, and the keeper, rushing out, exclaimed:
"Ah! the little master has come!"
Completely bewildered, the boy followed the servant through the gateway,
passed through several wide courts, and then into a garden where flowers
and strangely-twisted trees were growing.
This, then, was the house which his grandfather had promised him--the
home of his ancestors. Ah! how beautiful! how beautiful! Many men and
women servants bowed low as he passed, saluting with great respect and
crying out:
"Yes, it is really the little master! He has come back to his own!"
K'ang-p'u, seeing how well dressed the servants were, felt much ashamed
of his own ragged garments, and put up his hands to hide a torn place.
What was his amazement to find that he was no longer clad in soiled,
ragged clothes, that he was dressed in the handsomest embroidered silk.
From head to foot he was fitted out like the young Prince his father had
pointed out to him one day in the city.
Then they entered a magnificent reception-hall on the other side of the
garden. K'ang-p'u could not keep back his tears, for there stood his
father waiting to meet him.
"My boy! my boy!" cried the father, "you have come back to me. I feared
you had been stolen away for ever."
"Oh, no!" said K'ang-p'u, "you have not lost me, but I have lost the
tablet. A thief came and took it last night while I was sleeping."
"Lost the tablet! A thief! Why, no, my son, you are mistaken! There it
is, just before you."
K'ang-p'u looked, and saw standing on a handsome carved table the
very thing he had mourned as lost. As he stared in surprise he almost
expected to see the tiny figure swinging its legs over the top, and to
hear the high-pitched voice of his grandfather.
"Yes, it is really the lost tablet!" he cried joyfully. "How glad I am
it is back in its rightful place once more."
Then father and son fell upon their knees before the wooden emblem, and
bowed reverently nine times to the floor, thanking the spirit for all it
had done for them. When they arose their hearts were full of a new
happiness.
THE GOLDEN NUGGET
Once upon a time many, many years ago, there lived in China two friends
named Ki-wu and Pao-shu. These two young men, like Damon and Pythias,
loved each other and were always together. No cross words passed between
them; no unkind thoughts marred their friendship. Many an interesting
tale might be told of their unselfishness, and of how the good fairies
gave them the true reward of virtue. One story alone, however, will be
enough to show how strong was their affection and their goodness.
It was a bright beautiful day in early spring when Ki-wu and Pao-shu set
out for a stroll together, for they were tired of the city and its
noises.
"Let us go into the heart of the pine forest," said Ki-wu lightly.
"There we can forget the cares that worry us; there we can breathe the
sweetness of the flowers and lie on the moss-covered ground."
"Good!" said Pao-shu, "I, too, am tired. The forest is the place for
rest."
Happy as two lovers on a holiday, they passed along the winding road,
their eyes turned in longing toward the distant tree-tops. Their hearts
beat fast in youthful pleasure as they drew nearer and nearer to the
woods.
"For thirty days I have worked over my books," sighed Ki-wu. "For thirty
days I have not had a rest. My head is stuffed so full of wisdom, that I
am afraid it will burst. Oh, for a breath of the pure air blowing
through the greenwood."
"And I," added Pao-shu sadly, "have worked like a slave at my counter
and found it just as dull as you have found your books. My master treats
me badly. It seems good, indeed, to get beyond his reach."
Now they came to the border of the grove, crossed a little stream,
and plunged headlong among the trees and shrubs. For many an hour they
rambled on, talking and laughing merrily; when suddenly on passing round
a clump of flower-covered bushes, they saw shining in the pathway
directly in front of them a lump of gold.
"See!" said both, speaking at the same time, and pointing toward the
treasure.
[Illustration: "THEY SAW SHINING IN THE PATHWAY, DIRECTLY IN FRONT OF
THEM, A LUMP OF GOLD."]
Ki-wu, stooping, picked up the nugget. It was nearly as large as a
lemon, and was very pretty. "It is yours, my dear friend," said he, at
the same time handing it to Pao-shu; "yours because you saw it first."
"No, no," answered Pao-shu, "you are wrong, my brother, for you were
first to speak. Now, you can never say hereafter that the good fairies
have not rewarded you for all your faithful hours of study."
"Repaid me for my study! Why, that is impossible. Are not the wise men
always saying that study brings its own reward? No, the gold is yours:
I insist upon it. Think of your weeks of hard labour--of the masters that
have ground you to the bone! Here is something far better. Take it,"
laughing. "May it be the nest egg by means of which you may hatch out a
great fortune."
Thus they joked for some minutes, each refusing to take the treasure
for himself; each insisting that it belonged to the other. At last, the
chunk of gold was dropped in the very spot where they had first spied
it, and the two comrades went away, each happy because he loved his
friend better than anything else in the world. Thus they turned their
backs on any chance of quarrelling.
"It was not for gold that we left the city," exclaimed Ki-wu warmly.
"No," replied his friend, "One day in this forest is worth a thousand
nuggets."
"Let us go to the spring and sit down on the rocks," suggested Ki-wu.
"It is the coolest spot in the whole grove."
When they reached the spring they were sorry to find the place already
occupied. A countryman was stretched at full length on the ground.
"Wake up, fellow!" cried Pao-shu, "there is money for you near by. Up
yonder path a golden apple is waiting for some man to go and pick it
up."
Then they described to the unwelcome stranger the exact spot where the
treasure was, and were delighted to see him set out in eager search.
For an hour they enjoyed each other's company, talking of all the hopes
and ambitions of their future, and listening to the music of the birds
that hopped about on the branches overhead.
At last they were startled by the angry voice of the man who had gone
after the nugget. "What trick is this you have played on me, masters?
Why do you make a poor man like me run his legs off for nothing on a
hot day?"
"What do you mean, fellow?" asked Ki-wu, astonished. "Did you not find
the fruit we told you about?"
"No," he answered, in a tone of half-hidden rage, "but in its place a
monster snake, which I cut in two with my blade. Now, the gods will
bring me bad luck for killing something in the woods. If you thought you
could drive me from this place by such a trick, you'll soon find you
were mistaken, for I was first upon this spot and you have no right to
give me orders."
"Stop your chatter, bumpkin, and take this copper for your trouble. We
thought we were doing you a favour. If you are blind, there's no one but
yourself to blame. Come, Pao-shu, let us go back and have a look at this
wonderful snake that has been hiding in a chunk of gold."
Laughing merrily, the two companions left the countryman and turned back
in search of the nugget.
"If I am not mistaken," said the student, "the gold lies beyond that
fallen tree."
"Quite true; we shall soon see the dead snake."
Quickly they crossed the remaining stretch of pathway, with their eyes
fixed intently on the ground. Arriving at the spot where they had left
the shining treasure, what was their surprise to see, not the lump of
gold, not the dead snake described by the idler, but, instead, two
beautiful golden nuggets, each larger than the one they had seen at
first.
Each friend picked up one of these treasures and handed it joyfully to
his companion.
"At last the fairies have rewarded you for your unselfishness!" said
Ki-wu.
"Yes," answered Pao-shu, "by granting me a chance to give you your
deserts."
THE MAN WHO WOULD NOT SCOLD
Old Wang lived in a village near Nanking. He cared for nothing in the
world but to eat good food and plenty of it. Now, though this Wang was
by no means a poor man, it made him very sad to spend money, and so
people called him in sport, the Miser King, for Wang is the Chinese word
for king. His greatest pleasure was to eat at some one else's table when
he knew that the food would cost him nothing, and you may be sure that
at such times he always licked his chopsticks clean. But when he was
spending his own money, he tightened his belt and drank a great deal
of water, eating very little but scraps such as his friends would have
thrown to the dogs. Thus people laughed at him and said:
  "When Wang an invitation gets,
   He chews and chews until he sweats,
   But, when his own food he must eat.
   The tears flow down and wet his feet."
One day while Wang was lying half asleep on the bank of a stream that
flowed near his house he began to feel hungry. He had been in that
spot all day without tasting anything. At last he saw a flock of ducks
swimming in the river. He knew that they belonged to a rich man named
Lin who lived in the village. They were fat ducks, so plump and tempting
that it made him hungry to look at them. "Oh, for a boiled duck!" he
said to himself with a sigh. "Why is it that the gods have not given me
a taste of duck during the past year? What have I done to be thus
denied?"
Then the thought flashed into his mind: "Here am I asking why the gods
have not given me ducks to eat. Who knows but that they have sent this
flock thinking I would have sense enough to grab one? Friend Lin, many
thanks for your kindness. I think I shall accept your offer and take one
of these fowls for my dinner." Of course Mr. Lin was nowhere near to
hear old Wang thanking him.
By this time the flock had come to shore. The miser picked himself up
lazily from the ground, and, after tiring himself out, he at last
managed to pick one of the ducks up, too. He took it home joyfully,
hiding it under his ragged garment. Once in his own yard, he lost no
time in killing and preparing it for dinner. He ate it, laughing to
himself all the time at his own slyness, and wondering what his friend
Lin would think if he chanced to count his ducks that night. "No doubt
he will believe it was a giant hawk that carried off that bird," he
said, chuckling. "My word! but didn't I do a great trick? I think I will
repeat the dose to-morrow. The first duck is well lodged in my stomach,
and I am ready to take an oath that all the others will find a bed in
the same boarding-house before many weeks are past. It would be a pity
to leave the first one to pine away in lonely grief. I could never be so
cruel."
So old Wang went to bed happy. For several hours he snored away noisily,
dreaming that a certain rich man had promised him good food all the rest
of his life, and that he would never be forced to do another stroke of
work. At midnight, however, he was wakened from his sleep by an
unpleasant itching. His whole body seemed to be on fire, and the pain
was more than he could bear. He got up and paced the floor. There was no
oil in the house for his lamp, and he had to wait until morning to see
what was the matter. At early dawn he stepped outside his shanty. Lo,
and behold! he found little red spots all over his body. Before his very
eyes he saw tiny duck feathers sprouting from these spots. As the
morning went by, the feathers grew larger and larger, until his whole
body was covered with them from head to foot. Only his face and hands
were free of the strange growth.
With a cry of horror, Wang began to pull the feathers out by handfuls,
flinging them in the dirt and stamping on them. "The gods have fooled
me!" he yelled. "They made me take the duck and eat it, and now they are
punishing me for stealing." But the faster he jerked the feathers out,
the faster they grew in again, longer and more glossy than before. Then,
too, the pain was so great that he could scarcely keep from rolling on
the ground. At last completely worn out by his useless labour, and
moaning with despair, he took to his bed. "Am I to be changed into a
bird?" he groaned. "May the gods have mercy on me!"
He tossed about on his bed: he could not sleep; his heart was sick with
fear. Finally he fell into a troubled sleep, and, sleeping, had a dream.
A fairy came to his bedside; it was Fairy Old Boy, the friend of the
people. "Ah, my poor Wang," said the fairy, "all this trouble you have
brought upon yourself by your shiftless, lazy habits. When others work,
why do you lie down and sleep your time away? Why don't you get up and
shake your lazy legs? There is no place in the world for such a man as
you except the pig-sty."
"I know you are telling the truth," wailed Wang, "but how, oh, how can I
ever work with all these feathers sticking out of me? They will kill me!
They will kill me!"
"Hear the man!" laughed Old Boy. "Now, if you were a hopeful, happy
fellow, you would say, 'What a stroke of luck! No need to buy garments.
The gods have given me a suit of clothes that will never wear out.' You
are a pretty fellow to be complaining, aren't you?"
After joking in this way for a little while, the good fairy changed his
tone of voice and said, "Now, Wang, are you really sorry for the way
you have lived, sorry for your years of idleness, sorry because you
disgraced your old Father and Mother? I hear your parents died of hunger
because you would not help them."
Wang, seeing that Old Boy knew all about his past life, and, feeling his
pain growing worse and worse every minute, cried out at last: "Yes! Yes!
I will do anything you say. Only, I pray you, free me of these
feathers!"
"I wouldn't have your feathers," said Old Boy, "and I cannot free you of
them. You will have to do the whole thing yourself. What you need is to
hear a good scolding. Go and get Mr. Lin, the owner of the stolen duck,
to scold freely. The harder he scolds, the sooner will your feathers
drop out."
Now, of course, some readers will laugh and say, "But this was only
a silly dream, and meant nothing." Mr. Wang, however, did not think
in this way. He woke up very happy. He would go to Mr. Lin, confess
everything and take the scolding. Then he would be free of his feathers
and would go to work. Truly he had led a lazy life. What the good Fairy
Old Boy had said about his father and mother had hurt him very badly,
for he knew that every word was true. From this day on, he would not be
lazy; he would take a wife and become the father of a family.
Miser Wang meant all right when he started out from his shanty. From his
little hoard of money he took enough cash to pay Mr. Lin for the stolen
duck. He would do everything the fairy had told him and even more. But
this doing more was just where he got into trouble. As he walked along
the road jingling the string of cash, and thinking that he must soon
give it up to his neighbour, he grew very sad. He loved every copper of
his money and he disliked to part with it. After all, Old Boy had not
told him he must confess to the owner of the duck; he had said he must
go to Lin and get Lin to give a good scolding. "Old Boy did not say that
Lin must scold me," thought the miser. "All that I need do is to get
him to scold, and then my feathers will drop off and I shall be happy.
Why not tell him that old Sen stole his duck, and get him to give Sen a
scolding? That will surely do just as well, and I shall save my money as
well as my face. Besides, if I tell Lin that I am a thief, perhaps he
will send for a policeman and they will haul me off to prison. Surely
going to jail would be as bad as wearing feathers. Ha, ha! This will be
a good joke on Sen, Lin, and the whole lot of them. I shall fool Fairy
Old Boy too. Really he had no right to speak of my father and mother in
the way he did. After all, they died of fever, and I was no doctor to
cure them. How could he say it was my fault?"
The longer Wang talked to himself, the surer he became that it was
useless to tell Lin that he had stolen the duck. By the time he had
reached the duck man's house he had fully made up his mind to deceive
him. Mr. Lin invited him to come in and sit down. He was a plain-spoken,
honest kind of man, this Lin. Everybody liked him, for he never spoke
ill of any man and he always had something good to say of his
neighbours.
"Well, what's your business, friend Wang? You have come out bright and
early, and it's a long walk from your place to mine."
"Oh, I had something important I wanted to talk to you about," began
Wang slyly. "That's a fine flock of ducks you have over in the meadow."
"Yes," said Mr. Lin smiling, "a fine flock indeed." But he said nothing
of the stolen fowl.
"How many have you?" questioned Wang more boldly.
"I counted them yesterday morning and there were fifteen."
"But did you count them again last night?"
"Yes, I did," answered Lin slowly.
"And there were only fourteen then?"
"Quite right, friend Wang, one of them was missing; but one duck is of
little importance. Why do you speak of it?"
"What, no importance! losing a duck? How can you say so? A duck's a
duck, isn't it, and surely you would like to know how you lost it?"
"A hawk most likely."
"No, it wasn't a hawk, but if you would go and look in old Sen's duck
yard, you would likely find feathers."
"Nothing more natural, I am sure, in a duck yard."
"Yes, but your duck's feathers," persisted Wang.
"What! you think old Sen is a thief, do you, and that he has been
stealing from me?"
"Exactly! you have it now."
"Well, well, that is too bad! I am sorry the old fellow is having such
a hard time. He is a good worker and deserves better luck. I should
willingly have given him the duck if he had only asked for it. Too bad
that he had to steal it."
Wang waited to see how Mr. Lin planned to punish the thief, feeling sure
that the least he could do, would be to go and give him a good scolding.
But nothing of the kind happened. Instead of growing angry, Mr. Lin
seemed to be sorry for Sen, sorry that he was poor, sorry that he was
willing to steal.
"Aren't you even going to give him a scolding?" asked Wang in disgust.
"Better go to his house with me and give him a good raking over the
coals."
"What use, what use? Hurt a neighbour's feelings just for a duck? That
would be foolish indeed."
By this time the Miser King had begun to feel an itching all over his
body. The feathers had begun hurting again, and he was frightened once
more. He became excited and threw himself on the floor in front of Mr.
Lin.
"Hey! what's the matter, man?" cried Lin, thinking Wang was in a fit.
"What's the matter? Are you ill?"
"Yes, very ill," wailed Wang. "Mr. Lin, I'm a bad man, and I may as well
own it at once and be done with it. There is no use trying to dodge the
truth or hide a fault. I stole your duck last night, and to-day I came
sneaking over here and tried to put the thing off on old Sen."
"Yes, I knew it," answered Lin. "I saw you carrying the duck off under
your garment. Why did you come to see me at all if you thought I did not
know you were guilty?"
"Only wait, and I'll tell you everything," said Wang, bowing still
lower. "After I had boiled your duck and eaten it, I went to bed. Pretty
soon I felt an itching all over my body. I could not sleep and in the
morning I found that I had a thick growth of duck's feathers from head
to foot. The more I pulled them out, the thicker they grew in. I could
hardly keep from screaming. I took to my bed, and after I had tossed
about for hours a fairy came and told me that I could never get rid of
my trouble unless I got you to give me a thorough scolding. Here is the
money for your duck. Now for the love of mercy, scold, and do it
quickly, for I can't stand the pain much longer."
Wang was grovelling in the dirt at Lin's feet, but Lin answered him only
with a loud laugh which finally burst into a roar. "Duck feathers! ha!
ha! ha! and all over your body? Why, that's too good a story to believe!
You'll be wanting to live in the water next. Ha! Ha! Ha!"
"Scold me! scold me!" begged Wang, "for the love of the gods scold me!"
But Lin only laughed the louder. "Pray let me see this wonderful growth
of feathers first, and then we'll talk about the scolding."
Wang willingly opened his garment and showed the doubting Lin that he
had been really speaking the truth.
"They must be warm," said Lin, laughing. "Winter is soon coming and you
are not over fond of work. Won't they save you the trouble of wearing
clothing?"
"But they make me itch so I can scarcely stand it! I feel like screaming
out, the pain is so great," and again Wang got down and began to kowtow
to the other; that is, he knelt and bumped his forehead against the
"Be calm, my friend, and give me time to think of some good
scold-words," said Lin at last. "I am not in the habit of using strong
language, and very seldom lose my temper. Really you must give me time
to think of what to say."
By this time Wang was in such pain that he lost all power over himself.
He seized Mr. Lin by the legs crying out, "Scold me! scold me!"
Mr. Lin was now out of patience with his visitor. Besides Wang was
holding him so tightly that it really felt as if Lin were being pinched
by some gigantic crawfish. Suddenly Lin could hold his tongue no longer:
"You lazy hound! you whelp! you turtle! you lazy, good-for-nothing
creature! I wish you would hurry up and roll out of this!"
Now, in China, this is very strong language, and, with a cry of joy,
Wang leaped from the ground, for he knew that Lin had scolded him. No
sooner had the first hasty words been spoken than the feathers began
falling from the lazy man's body, and, at last, the dreadful itching
had entirely stopped. On the floor in front of Lin lay a great pile of
feathers, and Wang freed from his trouble, pointed to them and said,
"Thank you kindly, my dear friend, for the pretty names you have called
me. You have saved my life, and, although I have paid for the duck, I
wish to add to the bargain by making you a present of these handsome
feathers. They will, in a measure, repay you for your splendid set of
scold-words. I have learned my lesson well, I hope, and I shall go out
from here a better man. Fairy Old Boy told me that I was lazy. You agree
with the fairy. From this day, however, you shall see that I can bend my
back like a good fellow. Good-bye, and, many thanks for your kindness."
So saying, with many low bows and polite words, Wang left the duck
owner's house, a happier and a wiser man.
LU-SAN, DAUGHTER OF HEAVEN
Lu-san went to bed without any supper, but her little heart was hungry
for something more than food. She nestled up close beside her sleeping
brothers, but even in their slumber they seemed to deny her that love
which she craved. The gentle lapping of the water against the sides of
the houseboat, music which had so often lulled her into dreamland, could
not quiet her now. Scorned and treated badly by the entire family, her
short life had been full of grief and shame.
Lu-san's father was a fisherman. His life had been one long fight
against poverty. He was ignorant and wicked. He had no more feeling of
love for his wife and five children than for the street dogs of his
native city. Over and over he had threatened to drown them one and all,
and had been prevented from doing so only by fear of the new mandarin.
His wife did not try to stop her husband when he sometimes beat the
children until they fell half dead upon the deck. In fact, she herself
was cruel to them, and often gave the last blow to Lu-san, her only
daughter. Not on one day in the little girl's memory had she escaped
this daily whipping, not once had her parents pitied her.
On the night with which this story opens, not knowing that
Lu-san was listening, her father and mother were planning how to
get rid of her.
"The mandarin cares only about boys," said he roughly. "A man might kill
a dozen girls and he wouldn't say a word."
"Lu-san's no good anyway," added the mother. "Our boat is small, and
she's always in the wrong place."
"Yes, and it takes as much to feed her as if she were a boy. If you say
so, I'll do it this very night."
"All right," she answered, "but you'd better wait till the moon has
set."
"Very well, wife, we'll let the moon go down first, and then the girl."
No wonder Lu-san's little heart beat fast with terror, for there could
be no doubt as to the meaning of her parents' words.
At last when she heard them snoring and knew they were both sound
asleep, she got up silently, dressed herself, and climbed the ladder
leading to the deck. Only one thought was in her heart, to save herself
by instant flight. There were no extra clothes, not a bite of food to
take with her. Besides the rags on her back there was only one thing
she could call her own, a tiny soapstone image of the goddess Kwan-yin,
which she had found one day while walking in the sand. This was the only
treasure and plaything of her childhood, and if she had not watched
carefully, her mother would have taken even this away from her. Oh,
how she had nursed this idol, and how closely she had listened to the
stories an old priest had told about Kwan-yin the Goddess of Mercy, the
best friend of women and children, to whom they might always pray in
time of trouble.
It was very dark when Lu-san raised the trapdoor leading to the outer
air, and looked out into the night. The moon had just gone down, and
frogs were croaking along the shore. Slowly and carefully she pushed
against the door, for she was afraid that the wind coming in suddenly
might awaken the sleepers or, worse still, cause her to let the trap
fall with a bang. At last, however, she stood on the deck, alone and
ready to go out into the big world. As she stepped to the side of the
boat the black water did not make her feel afraid, and she went ashore
without the slightest tremble.
Now she ran quickly along the bank, shrinking back into the shadows
whenever she heard the noise of footsteps, and thus hiding from the
passers-by. Only once did her heart quake, full of fear. A huge boat dog
ran out at her barking furiously. The snarling beast, however, was not
dangerous, and when he saw this trembling little girl of ten he sniffed
in disgust at having noticed any one so small, and returned to watch his
gate.
Lu-san had made no plans. She thought that if she could escape the
death her parents had talked about, they would be delighted at her
leaving them and would not look for her. It was not, then, her own
people that she feared as she passed the rows of dark houses lining the
shore. She had often heard her father tell of the dreadful deeds done
in many of these houseboats. The darkest memory of her childhood was of
the night when he had almost decided to sell her as a slave to the owner
of a boat like these she was now passing. Her mother had suggested that
they should wait until Lu-san was a little older, for she would then be
worth more money. So her father had not sold her. Lately, perhaps, he
had tried and failed.
That was why she hated the river dwellers and was eager to get past
their houses. On and on she sped as fast as her little legs could carry
her. She would flee far away from the dark water, for she loved the
bright sunshine and the land.
As Lu-san ran past the last houseboat she breathed a sigh of relief and
a minute later fell in a little heap upon the sand. Not until now had
she noticed how lonely it was. Over there was the great city with its
thousands of sleepers. Not one of them was her friend. She knew nothing
of friendship, for she had had no playmates. Beyond lay the open fields,
the sleeping villages, the unknown world. Ah, how tired she was! How far
she had run! Soon, holding the precious image tightly in her little hand
and whispering a childish prayer to Kwan-yin, she fell asleep.
When Lu-san awoke, a cold chill ran through her body, for bending over
her stood a strange person. Soon she saw to her wonder that it was a
woman dressed in beautiful clothes like those worn by a princess. The
child had never seen such perfect features or so fair a face. At first,
conscious of her own filthy rags, she shrank back fearfully, wondering
what would happen if this beautiful being should chance to touch her and
thus soil those slender white fingers. As the child lay there trembling
on the ground, she felt as if she would like to spring into the fairy
creature's arms and beg for mercy. Only the fear that the lovely one
would vanish kept her from so doing. Finally, unable to hold back any
longer, the little girl, bending forward, stretched out her hand to the
woman, saying, "Oh, you are so beautiful! Take this, for it must be you
who lost it in the sand."
The princess took the soapstone figure, eyed it curiously, and then with
a start of surprise said, "And do you know, my little creature, to whom
you are thus giving your treasure?"
"No," answered the child simply, "but it is the only thing I have in all
the world, and you are so lovely that I know it belongs to you. I found
it on the river bank."
Then a strange thing happened. The graceful, queenly woman bent over,
and held out her arms to the ragged, dirty child. With a cry of joy the
little one sprang forward; she had found the love for which she had been
looking so long.
"My precious child, this little stone which you have kept so lovingly,
and which without a thought of self you have given to me--do you know of
whom it is the image?"
"Yes," answered Lu-san, the colour coming to her cheeks again as she
snuggled up contentedly in her new friend's warm embrace, "it is the
dear goddess Kwan-yin, she who makes the children happy."
"And has this gracious goddess brought sunshine into your life, my
pretty one?" said the other, a slight flush covering her fair cheeks at
the poor child's innocent words.
"Oh, yes indeed; if it had not been for her I should not have escaped
to-night. My father would have killed me, but the good lady of heaven
listened to my prayer and bade me stay awake. She told me to wait until
he was sleeping, then to arise and leave the houseboat."
"And where are you going, Lu-san, now that you have left your father?
Are you not afraid to be alone here at night on the bank of this great
river?"
"No, oh no! for the blessed mother will shield me. She has heard my
prayers, and I know she will show me where to go."
The lady clasped Lu-san still more tightly, and something glistened in
her radiant eye. A tear-drop rolled down her cheek and fell upon the
child's head, but Lu-san did not see it, for she had fallen fast asleep
in her protector's arms.
When Lu-san awoke, she was lying all alone on her bed in the houseboat,
but, strange to say, she was not frightened at finding herself once more
near her parents. A ray of sunlight came in, lighting up the child's
face and telling her that a new day had dawned. At last she heard the
sound of low voices, but she did not know who were the speakers. Then
as the tones grew louder she knew that her parents were talking. Their
speech, however, seemed to be less harsh than usual, as if they were
near the bed of some sleeper whom they did not wish to wake.
"Why," said her father, "when I bent over to lift her from the bed,
there was a strange light about her face. I touched her on the arm, and
at once my hand hung limp as if it had been shot. Then I heard a voice
whispering in my ears, 'What! would you lay your wicked hands on one who
made the tears of Kwan-yin flow? Do you not know that when she cries the
gods themselves are weeping?'"
"I too heard that voice," said the mother, her voice trembling; "I heard
it, and it seemed as if a hundred wicked imps pricked me with spears, at
every prick repeating these terrible words, 'And would you kill a
daughter of the gods?'"
"It is strange," he added, "to think how we had begun to hate this
child, when all the time she belonged to another world than ours. How
wicked we must be since we could not see her goodness."
"Yes, and no doubt for every time we have struck her, a thousand blows
will be given us by Yama, for our insults to the gods."
Lu-san waited no longer, but rose to dress herself. Her heart was
burning with love for everything around her. She would tell her parents
that she forgave them, tell them how she loved them still in spite of
all their wickedness. To her surprise the ragged clothes were nowhere
to be seen. In place of them she found on one side of the bed the most
beautiful garments. The softest of silks, bright with flowers--so lovely
that she fancied they must have been taken from the garden of the
gods--were ready to slip on her little body. As she dressed herself she
saw with surprise that her fingers were shapely, that her skin was soft
and smooth. Only the day before, her hands had been rough and cracked by
hard work and the cold of winter. More and more amazed, she stooped to
put on her shoes. Instead of the worn-out soiled shoes of yesterday, the
prettiest little satin slippers were there all ready for her tiny feet.
[Illustration: AS SHE DRESSED HERSELF SHE SAW WITH SURPRISE THAT HER
FINGERS WERE SHAPELY.]
Finally she climbed the rude ladder, and lo, everything she touched
seemed to be changed as if by magic, like her gown. The narrow rounds of
the ladder had become broad steps of polished wood, and it seemed as if
she was mounting the polished stairway of some fairy-built pagoda. When
she reached the deck everything was changed. The ragged patchwork which
had served so long as a sail had become a beautiful sheet of canvas that
rolled and floated proudly in the river breeze. Below were the dirty
fishing smacks which Lu-san was used to, but here was a stately ship,
larger and fairer than any she had ever dreamed of, a ship which had
sprung into being as if at the touch of her feet.
After searching several minutes for her parents she found them trembling
in a corner, with a look of great fear on their faces. They were clad
in rags, as usual, and in no way changed except that their savage faces
seemed to have become a trifle softened. Lu-san drew near the wretched
group and bowed low before them.
Her mother tried to speak; her lips moved, but made no sound: she had
been struck dumb with fear.
"A goddess, a goddess!" murmured the father, bending forward three times
and knocking his head on the deck. As for the brothers, they hid their
faces in their hands as if dazzled by a sudden burst of sunlight.
For a moment Lu-san paused. Then, stretching out her hand, she touched
her father on the shoulder. "Do you not know me, father? It is Lu-san,
your little daughter."
The man looked at her in wonder. His whole body shook, his lips
trembled, his hard brutish face had on it a strange light. Suddenly he
bent far over and touched his forehead to her feet. Mother and sons
followed his example. Then all gazed at her as if waiting for her
command.
"Speak, father," said Lu-san. "Tell me that you love me, say that you
will not kill your child."
"Daughter of the gods, and not of mine," he mumbled, and then paused as
if afraid to continue.
"What is it, father? Have no fear."
"First, tell me that you forgive me."
The child put her left hand upon her father's forehead and held the
right above the heads of the others, "As the Goddess of Mercy has given
me her favour, so I in her name bestow on you the love of heaven. Live
in peace, my parents. Brothers, speak no angry words. Oh, my dear ones,
let joy be yours for ever. When only love shall rule your lives, this
ship is yours and all that is in it."
Thus did Lu-san change her loved ones. The miserable family which had
lived in poverty now found itself enjoying peace and happiness. At first
they did not know how to live as Lu-san had directed. The father
sometimes lost his temper and the mother spoke spiteful words; but as
they grew in wisdom and courage they soon began to see that only love
must rule.
All this time the great boat was moving up and down the river. Its
company of sailors obeyed Lu-san's slightest wish. When their nets were
cast overboard they were always drawn back full of the largest, choicest
fish. These fish were sold at the city markets, and soon people began to
say that Lu-san was the richest person in the whole country.
One beautiful day during the Second Moon, the family had just returned
from the temple. It was Kwan-yin's birthday, and, led by Lu-san, they
had gone gladly to do the goddess honour. They had just mounted to the
vessel's deck when Lu-san's father, who had been looking off towards the
west, suddenly called the family to his side. "See!" he exclaimed. "What
kind of bird is that yonder in the sky?"
As they looked, they saw that the strange object was coming nearer and
nearer, and directly towards the ship. Every one was excited except
Lu-san. She was calm, as if waiting for something she had long expected.
"It is a flight of doves," cried the father in astonishment, "and they
seem to be drawing something through the air."
At last, as the birds flew right over the vessel, the surprised
onlookers saw that floating beneath their wings was a wonderful chair,
all white and gold, more dazzling even than the one they had dreamed the
Emperor himself sat in on the Dragon Throne. Around each snow-white neck
was fastened a long streamer of pure gold, and these silken ribbons were
tied to the chair in such a manner as to hold it floating wherever its
light-winged coursers chose to fly.
Down, down, over the magic vessel came the empty chair, and as it
descended, a shower of pure white lilies fell about the feet of Lu-san,
until she, the queen of all the flowers, was almost buried. The doves
hovered above her head for an instant, and then gently lowered their
burden until it was just in front of her.
With a farewell wave to her father and mother, Lu-san stepped into the
fairy car. As the birds began to rise, a voice from the clouds spoke in
tones of softest music: "Thus Kwan-yin, Mother of Mercies, rewards
Lu-san, daughter of the earth. Out of the dust spring the flowers; out
of the soil comes goodness. Lu-san! that tear which you drew from
Kwan-yin's eye fell upon the dry ground and softened it; it touched the
hearts of those who loved you not. Daughter of earth no longer, rise
into the Western Heaven, there to take your place among the fairies,
there to be a star within the azure realms above."
As Lu-san's doves disappeared in the distant skies, a rosy light
surrounded her flying car. It seemed to those who gazed in wonder that
heaven's gates were opening to receive her. At last when she was gone
beyond their sight, suddenly it grew dark upon the earth, and the eyes
of all that looked were wet with tears.
     THE QUEEN OF LANTERN LAND
Once upon a time the youngest son of a king became filled with the
desire to go abroad and see the world. He got his father's permission to
depart, kissed his parents good-bye, mounted his black horse, and
galloped away down the high road. Soon the gray towers of the old castle
in which he was born hid themselves behind him.
The Prince journeyed on, spending the days in traveling, and the nights
in little wayside inns, till one day he found himself in the heart of
the Adamant Mountains. The great, red granite crags of the surrounding
peaks rose out of the gleaming snow like ugly fingers, and the slopes of
giant glaciers sparkled in the sun like torrents of diamonds. The Prince
sat down by some stunted trees whose tops had long before been broken
off by an avalanche, and began to eat the bit of bread and cheese which
he had stored in his pocket. His black horse, meanwhile, ate the grass
which grew here and there along the mountain path. And as the Prince sat
there in the bright sun and the silence of the mountains, he became
aware of a low, continuous roaring.
"There must be a waterfall near-by," said the Prince to himself. "I'll
go and see it."
So, casting another look at his steed, who was contentedly browsing, the
Prince climbed up the mountainside in the direction of the sound.
The Prince climbed and climbed, he went in this direction and in that,
yet the sound never grew any louder or fainter. Suddenly he realized
that he was hopelessly lost. The little path up which he had ridden had
vanished completely, and he had not the slightest idea in which
direction it lay. He called aloud, but only the mountain echoes answered
mockingly.
Night came, and the Prince took shelter behind a great rock. All the
next day he labored to find the path, but in vain. He grew very hungry
and cold. Every once in a while he would hear the roaring of the
waterfall, which seemed to have grown louder.
Another day dawned, and another day again. The Prince was getting very
weak. He knew that he was approaching the mysterious cataract, for the
noise of the water was now tremendous, and heaven and earth were full of
its roar. The third night came, and the full moon rose solemnly over the
snow-clad summits of the lonely and mysterious mountains. Suddenly the
Prince, walking blindly on, staggered through a narrow passage-way
between two splintered crags, and found himself face to face with the
mystery.
He stood on the snowy floor of a vast amphitheatre whose walls were the
steep sides of the giant mountains. Farthest away from him, and opposite
the moon, the wall of the bowl appeared as a giant black precipice,
whose top seemed to reach almost to the moon-dimmed stars; and over this
precipice a broad river was endlessly pouring, shining in the night like
the overflow of an ocean of molten silver. Though now very weak from
lack of food, and dizzy with the roaring of the cataract, the Prince
made his way to the shore of the foaming and eddying lake into which the
water was falling. Great was his surprise to discover that the overflow
of this lake disappeared into the earth through a long, low opening in
the cliff behind the fall. Greater still was his surprise to see a
strange many-colored light burning within the cave.
The Prince made his way toward the light, along a narrow beach of white
sand lying between the wall of the cavern and the racing waters of the
mysterious river, and found that the glow came from a magnificent
lantern studded with emeralds, topazes, amethysts, and rubies, which
hung by a chain from the roof of the grotto. Directly under this
lantern, drawn up on the sand, lay a little boat with a lantern fastened
to the bow. The Prince pushed the boat into the river, and got into it,
and the swift current seized him and hurried him away.
At first the cavern grew higher and wider; then it shrank again, and the
boat, borne along with incredible speed, shot down a rocky passageway
into the very heart of the earth. The passageway broadened once more,
and the boat rode gently through monstrous caves whose roofs were upheld
by twisted columns taller than the tallest tree. There were times when
all was so still that the Prince could easily have imagined himself back
in the solitude of the mountains; there were times when the foaming and
roaring of the underground river grew so deafening that the Prince
feared lest he might be approaching the brink of a subterranean
cataract.
Many hours passed. The Prince did not know whether it was night or day.
At length, while the boat was gliding through a vast hall, he fell
asleep. When he awoke, he found that the boat was floating on the black,
glassy surface of an immense underground ocean. All signs of the cavern
had disappeared. Far away, over the edge of this ocean, a strange,
beautiful glow mounted into the starless sky of the underworld. And
while the Prince was gazing at the glow, the boat swung into a new
current, and was borne swiftly toward the light. In a short time the
light grew so wide and bright that one would have believed that a
strange, golden sun had risen. The boat passed between two giant marble
pillars supporting enormous crystal globes filled with a golden fire,
and the Prince found himself in the harbor of Lantern Land.
A city lay before him, a strange golden city edging the shore of a vast,
semi-circular bay. Because in the centre of the earth there is neither
sun nor moon, the people have to be continually burning lights; and so
many and so great were the lanterns of Lantern Land that the town was as
bright as day. The edge of the harbor was marked with a row of golden
lanterns; there were immense lanterns at every six paces along the
streets; a lantern hung from every house; and the church-towers, instead
of having bells in them, had great golden lamps which illumined
everything for some distance about. Moreover, every inhabitant of
Lantern Land carried a lantern with him wherever he went, the rich
carrying golden lanterns set with transparent precious stones, the poor
carrying lights of ordinary glass.
Soon the Prince saw a magnificent ship coming out to meet him. The prow
was carved in the shape of a dragon's head, and a beautiful lantern hung
from its jaws. Overcome by hunger and fatigue, the poor Prince fell
insensible to the floor of his little boat. When he came to his senses
again, he was lying between sheets of the whitest, most delicate linen
in a great four-poster bed, in a room in the royal palace.
Thanks to his kind hosts, the Prince soon recovered his strength. When
he was completely himself again, he was summoned to an audience with the
Queen of Lantern Land.
The Queen, a very beautiful young woman, wearing a wonderful lantern
crown, sat on an ebony throne. On each side of the throne stood a tall
soldier, clad in scarlet and holding a long ebony staff surmounted by a
round lantern lit by a golden flame.
The Prince dropped on his knee, and thanked the Queen for her kindness
and hospitality.
"You are the first stranger to come to Lantern Land for a thousand
years," said the young Queen. "If it is not asking too much from a
guest, pray how did you happen to find the river of the underworld?"
So the Prince told her that he was a king's son, and described his
adventures in the mountains. You may be sure the Queen was glad to hear
of his royal birth, for she had fallen in love with him at first sight.
A month passed. The Prince remained a guest in the palace. All kinds of
festivities were given in his honor; there were wonderful dances,
masquerades, picnics, and theatricals going on all the time. One day the
Prince and the Queen, accompanied by a little group of courtiers, rode
to the frontier of Lantern Land. The lovers galloped ahead of the party
and reached a little hill beyond which there were no more lanterns.
Ahead of them the rolling land, sweeping farther and farther away from
the light, grew darker and darker, till it finally plunged into the
eternal night of the underworld.
The Prince looked at the Queen, and saw that she was weeping.
"Dear love, why do you weep?" asked the Prince, who felt sad to see
tears in his lady's lovely eyes.
"I weep to think that in spite of our love we must soon part forever,"
said the Queen.
"Part forever? Dear lady, what can you mean?" said the anxious Prince.
"A cruel fate hangs over us," replied the lady. "Know, dear Prince, that
I am promised in marriage to the Enchanter Dragondel, and that in
exactly eight days, he will come here to claim my hand."
"The Enchanter Dragondel--who is he?" said the Prince.
"Alas," said the Queen, "the Enchanter Dragondel is the most powerful
magician of all the underworld. He is about eight feet tall, has cruel
sunken eyes that burn like dull fires, and dresses entirely in black. We
met at a ball given by the King of the Goblins. Dragondel pursued me
with compliments. A few days afterwards, an iron boat arrived in the
port of Lantern Land, having on board a giant blue dog who is
Dragondel's younger brother. This terrible animal, from whose sight the
people of Lantern Land fled screaming, made his way to the palace, and
dropped at my feet a jeweled casket, which he carried between his jaws.
The casket contained Dragondel's request for my hand, and added that,
were I to refuse him, he would let loose a legion of ghosts and other
winged spirits against the lanterns of Lantern Land. I had a vision of
Lantern Land in darkness; of my poor subjects dying of fear and
starvation. Rather than let this vision come true, I accepted the
Enchanter. Soon I shall never see you again, for Dragondel will come and
take me to his awful castle which lies on an island in the dark ocean.
Nor will you ever be able to save me, for Dragondel has so bewitched the
waves that a terrible whirlpool forms on the sea when a boat approaches
the enchanted castle, and engulfs it."
"But I can fight Dragondel," said the Prince, like the brave youth that
he was.
"That would be of little use," replied the Queen, "for you would be
changed into a stone the instant you crossed swords with him. Tomorrow,
the blue dog arrives to remind me of my obligation, and to carry back to
the island some of the palace servants who are to make Dragondel's
castle ready for my coming."
The other members of the party now rode up, and the Queen dabbed her
eyes with her handkerchief, and pretended not to have been crying. The
Prince and the Queen felt very unhappy as they rode home.
On the next day, sure enough, the iron boat arrived, and the blue dog,
who was as large as a lion, went to the Queen's palace, and bade her
make ready for the coming wedding. A dozen of the Queen's servants were
then ordered to go with the blue dog to Dragondel's castle. Among these
servants, disguised as a kitchen lad, was the Prince; for he had
determined to see if there was not some way in which the young Queen
could be rescued from the wicked magician.
The boat neared the island, but no terrible whirlpool formed in the
enchanted sea. At last the boat reached Dragondel's castle. It stood on
the top of a high lonely rock against whose steep sides the waves of the
underground ocean were forever foaming and breaking, and it was half in
ruins and was very poorly lighted.
The Prince took his place in the kitchen, and sought for an opportunity
to prevent the marriage of Dragondel and the Queen.
For four days of the precious week, however, the poor Prince was kept so
busy baking and making pastries for the coming of the bride that he did
not have an instant to ask questions or do anything else.
In the morning hours of the fifth day there was a terrible moaning and
roaring outside, and the cooks rushed to the kitchen windows. An unhappy
fishing boat had been swept by the wind too near Dragondel's castle, the
enchanted whirlpool had formed, and caught the boat in its awful circle.
Now it went slowly round the outer edge, now, going faster and faster,
it slid down the side of the awful funnel, and finally it vanished. An
instant later, the whirlpool had disappeared, leaving the sea roaring
and foaming.
The Prince shuddered.
"Well you may shudder," said the chief cook, "for such would have been
your fate if our master's brother had not carried with him the talisman
which rules the whirlpool."
"Talisman? What talisman?" said the Prince affecting stupidity.
"Why the little golden hand, you fool," said the chief cook.
"My! it must be a great big hand to be able to quiet that whirlpool,"
said the Prince.
"Big indeed, you ninny!" growled the cook. "Why, the magic hand is only
as big as a baby's hand. I've seen it many times. The master carries it
in his pocket, and puts it under his pillow while he sleeps."
So, later on, when his work was done, and everybody had gone to bed, the
Prince, in the hope of stealing the talisman, tried to make his way to
Dragondel's bedchamber. But when he reached the foot of the stairs which
led to the Enchanter's room, he found it guarded by two black panthers
which stared at him with insolent yellow eyes and switched their long
tails. The Prince went outdoors, to see if there was any hope of
climbing to the room along the outer wall, and found that the windows of
Dragondel's chamber overlooked a cliff falling thousands of feet sheer
to the dark sea. Far, far away, the Prince saw the glow of Lantern Land.
Only a short time remained to him in which to save his beloved lady of
the lanterns.
As he wandered about, very sick at heart, he saw a little black cat
running madly back and forth along the edge of a steep cliff from one of
whose crevices came a persistent, unhappy mewing. The poor cat was a
mother-cat, and was trying to rescue a kitten of hers that had fallen
down between the rocks. At great risk of being dashed to pieces himself,
the brave Prince climbed down the precipice, rescued the kitten, and
gave it back to its anxious mother.
"Thank you, brave youth," said the old cat.
"May it some day be within my power to help you as you have helped me."
"You can help me this very moment," said the Prince. And he told the cat
who he was, why he had come to the castle, and of his desire to get
possession of the talisman.
"I will help you get the talisman," said the cat. "The panthers will let
me pass, for they are cousins of mine. But you must make another little
golden hand to take the place of the one I shall steal; for if Dragondel
misses the golden hand, he will summon his demons to find it, and we
shall both lose our lives. Go now to the kitchen, carve a small hand
with the fingers close together and the thumb lying close to the
fingers, gild it over with the gold dust you have had given you for the
pastry icings, and bring it to me tomorrow night at this very hour."
So the Prince worked the rest of the night carving and gilding the
little golden hand, and on the next night he gave it to the cat. The cat
took it in her mouth as she would have a mouse, walked coolly by the
panthers, and entered Dragondel's room. She had just succeeded in
getting the true hand out from under the magician's pillow when
Dragondel woke up. The cat was clever enough to pretend to be engaged in
a mouse-hunt, so the Enchanter paid no attention to her and fell asleep
once more. When the cat, however, got under Dragondel's couch again, the
two hands lay side by side and she could not remember just which one was
the talisman and which one the false hand. So because she had to act
quickly, she put one of the hands under the pillow, brought the other to
the Prince and told him her story. But so well matched were the little
hands, that even the Prince was far from certain that he had not got his
own hand back again.
And now came the seventh day, the day on which Dragondel, the blue dog,
and all the wicked Enchanter's friends were to sail to Lantern Land for
the marriage ceremony. The iron ship, made gay with a thousand small
scarlet lanterns, stood ready to carry them over. The Enchanter and his
company got in, and the vessel left the island.
The Prince stood watching the ship from the top of the cliffs. What
anxiety was in his heart! If Dragondel still possessed the true
talisman, he would cross the whirlpool safely, and marry the beautiful
The vessel sped on. It was now at some distance from the island.
"All is lost," thought the Prince with a sinking heart; "Dragondel has
the true talisman." And in his bitterness he was about to throw the
little golden hand which lay in his pocket down into the sea.
Suddenly the air became filled with a terrible moaning; the sea became
troubled; the whirlpool awoke. And the Prince saw the red lights of the
Enchanter's ship whirled round and round, faster and faster, till they
disappeared forever in the waters of the sunless sea.
As for the Prince, he soon found another boat, and taking with him the
talisman, his fellow servants, and the black cat and her kittens, he
returned to Lantern Land, married the Queen, and lived happily ever
after.
     THE ADVENTURES OF FLORIAN
[Illustration: Boy walking through forest following a small ball.]
Once upon a time there lived in an old and ruinous house by the shore of
the wild sea, a widowed nobleman and his only child, a daughter named
Isabella. They were very poor in spite of their high birth, so poor that
one by one the fields and woods of their little domain had been sold in
order to buy the bare necessities of life. Knowing that his death would
leave Isabella quite alone in the world and practically penniless, her
father brought her up more like a boy than a girl; she could ride a
horse as gracefully as an Amazon, she could swim like a born mermaid,
and even outdo her father in his favorite sport of fencing. Yet so sweet
was the gentle nature which the girl had inherited from her mother, that
this strange upbringing never spoiled her in the least.
Late one October evening, when the fierce gusts of wind from the sea
shook the old house to its very foundation and set the ragged tapestries
swaying on the walls, Isabella's father died, leaving her only the
ruinous house, a handful of copper pence, and a single golden florin.
The sum of money was enough to keep body and soul together for a few
weeks, but what was Isabella to do when the little pittance was gone?
Her father had once counseled her to go to the King and ask for his
protection; but the King's castle was hundreds of miles distant, and
Isabella shrank from begging or the highway.
At last the brave girl resolved to make her own way in the world. Taking
the golden florin with her, she went to a neighboring town, and
purchased a suit of clothes such as pages and squires wear who are in
the service of noblemen. She then caused her black hair to be cut short,
boy-fashion, put on the boy's clothes she had purchased, and went into
the market-place to see if she could not find a situation in the service
of some great family.
Now, it was the custom in those days for masters and servants to meet by
a fountain in the market-place, the masters who were in need of servants
standing on one side of the fountain, the servants who were in search of
masters on the other.
When Isabella came into the market-place, there was no one standing on
the masters' side of the fountain, but on the other side, ready for the
first master who should appear, was a little group of noisy and impudent
squires and pages. Isabella, or, as she now called herself, Florian,
strode boldly over and joined this group, her heart beating high with
the thrill of the great adventure.
Suddenly a black knight, mounted on a black horse and leading another
horse by the bridle, clattered over the cobble-stones of the square, and
taking his place by the fountain, called on the pages to come to him. In
spite of the horseman's summons, however, the pages paid no attention to
him at all. Curious to know the reason of this disdain, Florian
questioned a fellow page, and was told that the knight was no other than
the Enchanter of the Black Rock, and that no page or squire would take
service with him because his castle was haunted by goblins, ghosts, and
all manner of terrifying spirits.
Now, Florian was no coward, and, as the saying is, beggars cannot be
choosers. So, much to the astonishment of the pages, Florian walked over
to the Enchanter, who sat fuming with anger and impatience, and offered
to go with him. The Knight bade Florian mount the horse which he was
holding; and amid the cat-calls and hooting of the pages, master and boy
galloped away.
All day long they rode, and when it was near the end of the afternoon
Florian found himself at the edge of a wild and desolate moor. Within
the great circle of the horizon, under the pale sky, not a tree, not a
house, not a shepherd's hut even was to be seen--nothing but the great
barren waste rolling, rising and falling to the very edge of the world.
Lower and lower sank the sun; it grew cold, and a blue mist fell.
Twilight came, a green, mysterious twilight.
Suddenly, from a hillock of the moor, Florian beheld afar the enchanted
dwelling. A great sunken marsh lay before him, beginning at the foot of
the little hill and stretching away, league after league, till its
farther shore was hidden in the gathering darkness. The autumn wind
stirred the dead sedges at its brim, and though the dying twilight was
still gleaming in the sky, the great bog had caught little of its glow,
and lay full of coiling blue mists, pale quagmires, and islands of
mysterious darkness. A dreadful moaning cry, uttered by some demon of
the moor, sounded through the mist, chilling the blood in Florian's
veins; and as if in answer to the cry, thousands upon thousands of
will-o'-the-wisps appeared, darting and dancing. In the very heart of this
terrible marsh a great black rock uprose, and on this rock, its turrets
and battlements outlined against the burning face of the moon, stood the
castle. Ghostly lights, now green, now blue, flickered in its windows.
The Enchanter reined up his horse at the brink of the mire, and cried,--
  "List! List!
  Will-o'-the-Wisp,
  Lend me your light."
Scarcely had the last word fallen from the Enchanter's mouth, when the
dancing witch-fires hurried toward him from all sides of the marsh. Soon
a pale road leading across the bog to the castle stood revealed, an
enchanted road which melted away behind the riders as smoke melts into
the winter air. To the very gates of his castle did the ghost-fires
accompany the Enchanter; then, rising swiftly high into the air, they
fled like startled birds, in every direction.
Doors opened of their own will, strange goblins and ghostly creatures
passed, and bright, whirling globes of fire fled hissing across the
castle courtyard. Just as they were about to enter the castle itself,
the Enchanter turned, and fastened his burning eyes on Florian.
"Boy," said he, "let nothing that you hear or see make you afraid. Be
assured that no power or spirit can harm you. There is only one demon in
the world whose power is greater than mine, and that is Fear himself. Be
brave, keep the doors of your heart locked against Fear; be faithful,
and you shall never have cause to regret your coming."
So Florian, who was by nature brave, felt ashamed of having allowed the
demon Fear to knock at the door of his heart, and resolved never to let
his courage fail, no matter what might happen. And true to this resolve
the lad remained during the years he spent in the service of the
Enchanter. At first, to be sure, he had to struggle to conquer his fear
of some of the goblins; but as time passed and no ghost or goblin ever
ventured to annoy him, he grew accustomed to their presences and ended
by paying no more attention to them than he paid to the great ravens who
flew croaking over the mire. So faithful and courageous was the little
page that, when his year was up, the Enchanter begged him to remain yet
another year, promising him rich rewards if he stayed. When this second
year was up, however, Florian felt a longing to see the world again, and
told the Enchanter that he must be going.
"Very well," said the Enchanter, who respected the courage of the brave
page, "thou shalt do as thou desirest. Thou art a brave and faithful
lad. Here is a purse of gold for thy wages, and here are three gifts to
reward thy courage and good-will." He opened a copper casket and took
forth a little golden bird with outstretched wings hanging from a fine
golden chain, a golden key, and a scarlet sphere marked with a band of
white. "This little bird," continued the Enchanter, "will protect you
from the spells of any sorcerer whose power is less than mine, and will
sing when you fare into hidden danger; this key will open every door in
the world; and should you ever lose your way, you have but to put this
sphere on the ground, and it will roll home of its own accord. Moreover,
if you are ever yourself in deadly peril, call upon me, and I will come
and help you."
So Florian thanked the Enchanter, and taking his gifts, went back into
the world again. But so gentle and kind was he that he soon gave away to
the unfortunate all the gold he had earned, and was forced to go in
search of another situation. At length he entered the service of the
King and Queen of the Twelve Towers.
This royal couple, who were renowned in Fairyland as much for their
goodness and generosity as for their wealth and magnificence, had but
one son, Prince Florizel. No braver or more gallant prince ever drew
breath. He had driven the dragon of the blue cavern out of his father's
kingdom; he had fought three wicked ogres one after the other, and
finished each one; he had delivered the diamond castle of a terrible
spell which lay upon it.
When Florian entered the service of the King and Queen, these excellent
parents were sending their son on a visit to his uncle, the Emperor of
the Plain, and Florian was ordered to join the gay company of lords and
ladies, knights and soldiers, who were to make the journey. According to
the gossip of the company, Prince Florizel was being sent to his uncle's
in the hope that he would fall in love with his uncle's ward, the
beautiful Princess Rosamond.
Now in some way or other, after the company had been a few days on the
road, Prince Florizel, who watched over the company as carefully as a
good captain does over his soldiers, became aware of the bravery,
trustworthiness, and modest bearing of Florian, the little page, and
promoted him to be his own personal squire. Alas! no sooner had he been
advanced, than Florian the little page, though remaining outwardly a
page, became at heart the runaway girl, Isabella. Though she fought as
hard as she could against her own heart, it was of little use, and she
knew herself to be deeply in love with the gallant Florizel. Yet she
suffered no word or sign of her affection to escape her, for Prince
Florizel thought her only a little page, and to speak would be to betray
the secret she had so long and successfully guarded.
One morning, as the cavalcade was riding through a charming country,
Florian, for so we must still continue to call Isabella, was following
close behind his master, when the Prince caught sight of a wonderful
scarlet flower, something like a scarlet lily, blooming by the roadside.
At the same moment, the little golden bird that Florian wore round his
neck sang a few clear notes as if it were alive.
"What a pretty flower!" said the Prince. "I must have it."
And he was about to dismount and pick the flower, when Florian spurred
on ahead of him, grasped the enchanted flower, and tossed it into a
"Fie, what a naughty page!" cried the lords and ladies.
The company rode on a few miles more, and suddenly the Prince caught
sight of a beautiful jeweled dagger lying in the highway. At the same
moment the little golden bird sang a few clear notes of warning.
"What a fine dagger!" cried the Prince, "I must have it."
And he was about to dismount and pick up the dagger, when Florian
spurred on ahead of him, seized the dagger, and tossed it into a ditch.
The company now rode on for a few miles more, and the Prince saw by the
roadside a beautiful enchanted garden. Birds of many colors sang in the
branches of the trees, fountains sparkled and danced in the sunlight,
and the sweetest of music was heard. At the same moment the golden bird
sang louder and longer than ever.
"What a beautiful garden!" cried the Prince. "Let us ride in and look
about."
So Florian hurried to the Prince's side, and implored him not to enter,
saying that the garden was enchanted and that some harm would certainly
befall him.
At this, all the lords and ladies, who were a little jealous, perhaps,
that a page should know more than they, laughed at poor Florian, and
even Florizel smiled at him and said, "All that is only fancy, little
Florian," and dashed in through the garden gate. For a minute or so
nothing happened, and the first to enter mocked at Florian again; but
when the whole company had entered the garden, there was a clap of
thunder, and everybody except the Prince and Florian, who was protected
by the Enchanter's charm, was turned into stone. The echoes of the
thunder had hardly ceased rolling when two frightful demons with lions'
heads rushed towards them through the garden, seized the Prince, and
hurried him away. Florian was left alone in the garden. Night was fast
approaching.
Now, the owner of the enchanted garden was a witch, who had a daughter
so frightfully ugly that even her mother's powerful magic could not make
her beautiful. In spite of her ugliness, however, the witch's daughter
considered herself quite beautiful, and was always importuning her
mother to invite to the castle princes whom she considered worthy of her
hand. So the old witch gave wonderful dances and parties, to which all
the eligible young kings and princes of the neighborhood were invited;
but just as soon as the witch's daughter appeared with a horrid smirk on
her ugly face, the young men were sure to make their excuses and ride
At length the old witch, who had just had a severe tongue-lashing from
her daughter for not punishing the Prince of Zagabondiga after that
prince had failed to ask her for a dance, could endure her daughter's
scolding no longer, and resolved to catch the first prince who came past
her garden, and force him, willy nilly, to accept her ugly daughter.
Into her trap poor Florizel had walked, and the witch, hoping to bend
him to her will by terrifying him, had thrown him into a deep dungeon.
The ugly daughter had immediately peeked through the key-hole of the
prison, and fallen in love with Florizel at first sight.
The witch was just considering what to do next, when her lion-headed
servitors informed her that one of the company had resisted her
enchantment, and was wandering about the garden. So the witch put on her
cloak of invisibility, and going down to the garden, found poor Florian
wandering disconsolately under the trees. She saw at once that it was
the little golden bird which had protected him from her magic; and being
afraid of the charm and yet unable to work the poor lad any harm while
the bird was in his possession, she decided to rid herself of Florian by
transporting her castle, gardens and all, over to the other side of the
world. So she uttered a spell, and everything disappeared.
When Florian woke the next morning, and found that the castle was gone,
his heart sank. Nevertheless, he did not despair, but taking from his
pocket the little scarlet ball which his master the Enchanter had given
him, he put it on the ground, and bade it guide him back to the
Enchanted Garden.
The little ball immediately began rolling ahead at Florian's own pace;
at night it glowed with a scarlet fire. Day after day, month after
month, the scarlet ball rolled on; it led Florian over hill and down
dale, through the land of the men who have only one eye, through the
country of the dwarfs, and the valley of the talking trees, never
stopping till it reached the gate of the witch's garden.
A year, meanwhile, had gone by, and during that year the witch had done
everything she could to induce Prince Florizel to accept her ugly
daughter. First she had tried frightening him, then she had tried to win
him by giving splendid fetes, then she had tried terrifying him again;
but as the Prince was neither to be terrified nor cajoled, she came to
her wits' end.  Finally she told the Prince that, if he were not willing
to accept her daughter in marriage on the very next day, she would turn
him into a hare and set her dogs upon him. The Prince made no answer to
her terrible threat, and the witch went ahead and made preparation for
the grandest of weddings. On that night, Florian arrived at the garden.
When it was very late, and the moon, which was a quarter full, had
disappeared behind a bank of clouds, Florian crept unobserved to the
door of Florizel's prison; for the witch had locked him up so securely
that she had not taken the trouble to find a watchman. Alas! the poor
Prince lay at the top of a high tower, and twenty different doors, each
one opened by a different key, stood between him and the ground.
But Florian was not to be daunted, and drawing from his bosom the key
which the Enchanter had given him, he opened one door after the other
till he arrived in the cell occupied by the Prince.
The poor Prince lay chained on a bed of straw, trying to read a book by
the light of a single candle. He was very unhappy, for he had resolved
to let himself be torn in pieces rather than marry the ugly witch
maiden. You may be sure he was glad to see Florian.
"Dear Florian," said the unhappy Prince, "if I had only obeyed your
counsel, all would have been well." And he begged Florian to tell him
where he had been all the long year.
So Florian told the Prince of his adventures.
Now, the chains which the Prince wore were riveted cruelly upon him, and
since there was no lock to them, the magic key was of no avail. At
length, however, Florizel managed to work them off; but in doing so, he
injured his foot, and found to his dismay that he could only limp along.
Little by little the freshened air and the stir of leaves began to
foretell the coming of the dawn. Finally, just as the dawn-star began to
pale, Florizel and Florian hurried out of the prison through the twenty
doors, and fled to the highroad.
But they had traveled only a few miles, when the wicked witch discovered
Florizel's flight, and, dreadfully enraged, commanded that her dragon
car be got ready in order that she might go in pursuit of him. So the
car was brought forth, and into it the witch leaped, and mounted into
the sky. Hearing the hissing and roaring of the dragons in the air,
Florian and Florizel tried to hide under some trees; but the witch
instantly saw them, and pronounced a spell to turn them into hares. But
though the hate of the witch was quick, the woman's heart of Isabella
was quicker, and sacrificing herself for the man she loved, she threw
the chain and the golden bird over the Prince's head. An instant later
she had turned into a little gray hare crouching at Florizel's feet. At
the same moment, the cruel witch, who had arrived at her castle, let
loose her pack of fierce hunting dogs, who soon took up the trail of the
hare and came bounding toward her in full cry.
The poor Prince picked up the hare and hobbled forward as fast as he
could go, forgetting the dreadful pain it caused him; but the dogs were
running a hundred times faster than he. Nearer and nearer came the pack,
their red tongues lolling from their black throats. By good fortune,
just as the leader of the pack was not more than fifty feet away,
Isabella had wit enough to remember the promise which the Enchanter had
made her, and called upon him. Immediately a strong glass wall, as high
as a castle tower, shot up from the ground behind Isabella and the
Prince; and the pack, hurrying forward, found themselves baulked of
their prey. Snarling and yelling, they threw themselves against the
magic wall; but in vain.
In another instant, the Enchanter himself stood before them, and
touching the hare with his wand, restored Isabella to her human form.
She still wore the garments of Florian, however, and the Prince still
thought her a boy.
Suddenly a shadow fell on the ground near them, and looking up, all
beheld the wicked witch and her ugly daughter, who had ridden out in the
dragon car to enjoy Florizel's cruel death. The Enchanter immediately
caused the dragon car to vanish, and the witch and her daughter fell
tumbling through the air into a pond, and were changed into ugly little
fishes. Then the Enchanter carried Florizel and Florian back to the
witch's castle, where they found the tables spread and the dinner being
prepared which was to celebrate the wedding of Florizel and the witch's
daughter. Last of all, he released Florizel's company from the witch's
spell.
Now, one of the ladies, when she heard how the witch had tried to match
Florizel with her daughter, and saw the preparations for the wedding,
told the Prince that it was a pity that the Princess Rosamond were not
at hand, so that there might be a wedding after all.
"A wedding? No," said Florizel, "not till I have found a wife who shall
have proved herself as faithful and true as little Florian."
"She is already here," said the Enchanter. And he touched Florian with
his wand.
Immediately there was a flash of flame, and out of it, Florian no
longer, but her own self, appeared Isabella. Her hair had grown long
again, and the Enchanter had clad her in the most magnificent of gowns.
Never was there a lovelier girl to be seen on earth. You may be sure
that the Prince stepped forward, took her by the hand, and claimed her
for his bride.
Soon the parents of Florizel, who had been summoned by the Enchanter,
arrived, and there was a wedding after all. When the merrymaking was
over, the Enchanter went back to his castle on the Black Rock, while
Florizel and Isabella returned to their own country, and lived there
happily to a good old age.
     THE SELLER OF DREAMS
Once upon a time a mother called her only son into the kitchen, gave him
a basket of fine, fresh eggs, and bade him carry them to his Aunt Jane,
who lived a few miles down the valley. The son, a lively lad about
twelve years of age, obeyed his mother with joy, and clapping his little
green hat on his head, stepped forth into the road. It was a beautiful
clear morning in the spring, and the earth, released from the icy chains
of winter, was rejoicing in her freedom and the return of the sun. A few
birds, just back from the southland, rocked on twigs swollen with
bursting buds, a thousand rills flowing from everywhere and in every
direction sparkled and sang, and the air was sweet with the odor of
ploughed fields.
The boy, whose name was Peter, walked along whistling. Suddenly he saw a
spot on the road shining as dazzlingly as if a bit of the sun itself had
fallen to the earth. "A bit of glass," thought Peter. But it was not a
bit of glass after all, but a fine golden florin which must have dropped
from somebody's purse.
Peter stooped, picked up the gold piece, put it in his pocket, and
walked off whistling louder than ever. In a little while he came to a
place where the road wound down a little hill, and Peter saw, trudging
up this hill, a very strange looking old man. He was a very old man; his
face was puckered up into a thousand wrinkles like the skin of a
shrunken apple, and he had long, snow-white hair and a white beard which
reached almost to his waist. Moreover, he was strangely dressed in a
robe of cherry scarlet, and wore golden shoes. From a kind of belt hung
two horns on silver chains, one an ordinary cow's horn, the other a
beautiful horn carved of the whitest ivory, and decorated with little
figures of men and animals.
"Dreams to sell! Dreams to sell!" called out the old man as soon as he
caught sight of Peter. "Don't you want to buy a dream, young man?"
"What kind of dreams have you?" asked Peter.
"Good, bad, true, false--all kinds," replied the seller of dreams. "I
have even a few thrilling nightmares. Dreams to sell! Dreams to sell!"
"How much does a dream cost?" asked Peter.
"A golden florin," answered the merchant.
"I'll have one, please," said Peter; and he handed over the florin he
had found.
The old man took a kind of wonderful sugarplum out of the ivory horn,
and gave it to Peter to eat.
"You will have the dream next time you sleep," said he, and trudged on.
So Peter continued his journey, stopping every once in a while to look
back at the strange old man, who was slowly climbing the hill. At length
Peter came to a little quiet grove of pines, and there he sat down on a
big stone and ate the luncheon which his mother had prepared for him.
The sun was high in the heavens; it was close on to high noon. Now, as
Peter was contentedly munching his bread and cheese, he heard, at first
far away, then quite near at hand, the clear notes of a coachman's horn.
The notes of the second call died away in a great pattering of hoofs and
tinkling of little bells, and suddenly, arriving in a great swirl of
yellow dust, came a magnificent coach drawn by twelve white horses. A
lady, very richly dressed and wearing many sparkling diamonds, sat
within the coach. To Peter's astonishment, the lady was his Aunt Jane.
The coach stopped with a great jingling of the twelve harnesses, and
Aunt Jane leaned out of the window, and said to Peter, "What are you
doing here, child?"
"I was on my way to your cottage with a basket of fine fresh eggs,"
answered Peter.
"Well, it's fortunate I found you," said Aunt Jane, "for I have given up
living in the cottage, and have now got a castle of my own. Jump in,
Peter, and don't forget your basket."
So Peter climbed into the coach, closed the door behind him, and was
driven away. The coach went over hill and down dale; it went through
strange forests from whose branches green parrots whooped and shrieked;
it rolled through valleys in strange shining mountains. Peter stole a
look at Aunt Jane and saw that she was wearing a crown.
"Are you a queen, Aunt Jane?" he asked.
"Indeed, I am," replied his aunt. "You see, Peter, two days ago, while I
was looking for my white cow who had strayed away, I came upon the
magnificent castle to which we are now going. It has four beautiful
towers, and a door set with diamonds.
"'Whose castle is this?' I said to the lodge-keeper.
"'It's nobody's, marm,' said he.
"'What,' said I; 'do you mean to say that nobody owns this fine castle?'
"'That's just what I mean to say, marm,' answered he; 'the castle
belongs to anyone who wants it.'
"So into the castle I walked, and I did n't go out, you may be sure,
till I had been into every room that I could find. Then I put on these
clothes and these diamonds, which I found in a cupboard, and went down
and told the servants I intended to be queen. You see, Peter dear,
there's nothing that a woman of determination and energy can't
accomplish."
The coach rolled on, and soon Peter caught sight of Aunt Jane's castle.
It was rather large, and had an enormous round tower at each corner--a
thing which brought to Peter's mind the picture of an elephant lying on
its back. Peter and Aunt Jane, accompanied by a train of servants
dressed in blue-and-buff livery, walked into the castle through the
diamond-studded door.
"Do you think you could eat a little more of something?" said Aunt Jane,
taking off her white-kid gloves; "because if you can I'll have a place
set for you at the luncheon table."
And Peter, who like all boys, could eat a little more anywhere and at
any time, readily answered, "Yes."
So Peter and Aunt Jane sat down to a wonderful little table covered with
a snow-white cloth.
"Draw your chair nearer, Peter dear," said Aunt Jane.
"I can't" said Peter, "it's stuck to the floor."
And so it was; the chair was stuck to the floor, and no amount of
pushing or pulling could budge it.
"That's odd," said Aunt Jane; "but never mind, I'll push the table over
to the chair."
But like the chair, the table refused to budge. Peter then tried to
slide his plate of soup closer to him, but the plate, which the servant
had placed on the cloth but an instant before, had evidently frozen to
the table in some extraordinary manner and could not be moved an inch.
The soup in the plate, however, was not fastened to the dish, nor were
the wonderful strawberry-cakes and the delicious ices with which the
dinner closed.
"You don't suppose this castle is enchanted, do you, Aunt Jane?" asked
Peter.
"Not a bit of it," replied Aunt Jane. "And even if it were," she
continued recklessly, "I should n't mind, for there's nothing that a
woman of determination and energy can't accomplish." There was a pause,
and then Aunt Jane added, "I am going to have some guests to dinner this
evening, so run round and amuse yourself as well as you can. There's
ever so much to see in the castle, and in the garden there's a pond with
swans in it."
Attended by her servants, Aunt Jane majestically walked away. Peter
spent the afternoon exploring the castle. He went through room after
room; he scurried through the attics like a mouse, and was even lost for
a while in the cellars. And everywhere he went, he found everything
immovable. The beds, tables, and chairs could neither be moved about nor
lifted up, and even the clocks and vases were mysteriously fastened to
their places on the shelves.
The night came on. Coach after coach rolled up to the diamond door,
which sparkled in the moonlight. When the guests had all arrived, a
silver trumpet sounded, and Aunt Jane, dressed in a wonderful gown of
flowering brocade edged with pearls, came solemnly down the great
stairway of the castle hall. Two little black boys, dressed in oriental
costume and wearing turbans, held up her gorgeous train, and she looked
very grand indeed. Peter, to his great surprise, found himself dressed
in a wonderful suit of plum-colored velvet.
"Welcome, my friends," said Queen Jane, who had opened a wonderful
ostrich-feather fan. "Are we not fortunate in having so beautiful a
night for our dinner?"
And the Queen, giving her arm to a splendid personage in the uniform of
an officer of the King's dragoons, led the way to the banquet-hall.
The wonderful party, all silks and satins, and gleaming with jewels,
swept like a peacock's tail behind her. Soon dinner was over, and the
guests began to stray by twos and threes to the ballroom. Aunt Jane and
the soldier led off the grand march; then came wonderful, stately
minuets, quadrilles, and sweet old-fashioned waltzes. The merriment was
at its height when somebody ran heavily up the great stairs leading to
the ballroom, and the guests, turning round to see whence came the
clatter, saw standing in the doorway a strange old man dressed in a robe
of cherry scarlet and wearing golden shoes. It was the seller of dreams.
His white hair was disheveled, his robe was awry, and there was dust on
his golden shoes.
"Foolish people!" screamed the old seller of dreams, his voice rising to
a shriek, "Run your lives! This castle lies under a terrible
enchantment; in a few minutes it will turn upside-down. Have you not
seen that everything is fastened to the floor? Run for your lives!"
Immediately there was a great babble of voices, some shrieks, and more
confusion, and the guests ran pell-mell down the great stairs and out
the castle door. To Peter's dismay, Aunt Jane was not among them. So
into the castle he rushed again, calling at the top of his voice, "Aunt
Jane! Aunt Jane!" He ran through the brilliantly lit and deserted
ballroom; he saw himself running in the great mirrors of the gallery.
"Aunt Jane!" he cried; but no Aunt Jane replied.
Peter rushed up the stairs leading to the castle tower, and emerged upon
the balcony. He saw the black shadow of the castle thrown upon the grass
far below by the full moon; he saw the great forest, so bright above and
so dark and mysterious below, and the long snow-clad range of the
Adamant Mountains. Suddenly a voice, louder than the voice of any human
being, a voice deep, ringing, and solemn as the sound of a great bell,
cried,--
"'T is time!"
Immediately everything became as black as ink, people shrieked, the
enchanted castle rolled like a ship at sea, and leaning far to one side,
began to turn upside-down. Peter felt the floor of the balcony tip
beneath him; he tried to catch hold of something, but could find
nothing; suddenly, with a scream, he fell. He was falling, falling,
falling, falling, falling.
When Peter came to himself, instead of its being night, it was still
noonday, and he was sitting on the same stone in the same quiet roadside
grove from which he had caught sight of his Aunt Jane in her wonderful
coach. A blue jay screamed at him from overhead. For Aunt Jane, the
coach, and the enchanted castle had been only a dream. Peter, you see,
had fallen asleep under the pines, and while he slept, he had dreamed
the dream he purchased from the seller of dreams.
Very glad to be still alive, Peter rubbed his eyes, took up his basket
of eggs, and went down the road whistling.
[Illustration: Old man and boy in the forest.]
  "How much does a dream cost?" asked Peter.
  "A golden florin," answered the Seller of Dreams
     THE TREASURE CASTLE
[Illustration: Three men in a flying castle tower.]
Once upon a time a hunter was roaming through the wildwood when he heard
a voice crying piteously for aid. Following the sound, the hunter
plunged ahead, and discovered a dwarf caught in a pit which had been dug
to trap wild animals.
After the hunter had rescued the dwarf from his prison, the little man
said to him: "Go ten leagues to the north till you arrive at a gigantic
pine; then turn to the east, and go ten leagues more till you come to a
black castle. Enter the castle without fear, and you will discover a
round room in which stands a round ebony table laden with gold and
jewels. Help yourself to the treasure, and return home at once. And do
not--now mark me well--go up into the turret of the castle; for if you
do, evil will come of it."
So the hunter thanked the dwarf, and after making sure that he had
plenty of bread and cheese in his knapsack, hurried northwards as fast
as his legs could carry him. Through bramble and brier, through valley
and wooded dale went he, and at dusk he came to a gigantic pine standing
solitary in a rocky field. Wearied with his long journey, the hunter lay
down beneath the pine and slept.
When it was dawn he woke refreshed, and turning his eyes toward the
level rays of the rising sun, began his journey to the east. Presently
he reached a height in the forest, and from this height, he saw, not
very far away, a black turret rising over the ocean of bright leaves. At
high noon he arrived at the castle. It was ruinous and quite deserted;
grass grew in the courtyard and between the bricks of the terrace, and
the oaken door was as soft and rotten as a log that has long been buried
in mire.
Entering the castle, the hunter soon discovered the round room. A table
laden with wonderful treasures stood in the centre of the chamber,
directly under a shower of sunlight pouring through a half-ruined window
in the mildewed wall. How the diamonds and precious stones sparkled and
gleamed!
Now, while the hunter was filling his pockets, the flash of a jewel
lying on the floor happened to catch his eye, and looking down, he saw
that a kind of trail of jewels lay along the floor leading out of the
room. Following the scattered gems,--which had the appearance of having
been spilled from some treasure-casket heaped too high,--the hunter came
to a low door, and opening this door, he discovered a flight of stone
steps leading to the turret. The steps were strewn carelessly with the
finest emeralds, topazes, beryls, moonstones, rubies, and crystal
diamonds.
Remembering the counsel of his friend the dwarf, however, the hunter did
not go up the stairs, but hurried home with his treasure.
When the hunter returned to his country, the wonderful treasures which
he had taken from the castle in the wood made him a very rich man, and
in a short time the news of his prosperity came to the ears of the King.
This King was the wickedest of rogues, and his two best friends, the
Chamberlain and the Chancellor, were every bit as unscrupulous as he.
They oppressed the people with taxes, they stole from the poor, they
robbed the churches; indeed there was no injustice which they were not
ready to commit. So, when the Chamberlain heard of the hunter's wealth,
he--being a direct, straightforward rascal--declared that the simplest
thing to do would be to kill the hunter and take his money.
The Chancellor, who was somewhat more cunning and worldly, declared that
it would be better to throw the hunter into a foul, dark dungeon till he
was ready to buy his freedom with all his wealth.
The King, who was the wickedest and wisest of the precious three,
declared that the best thing to do was to find out whence the hunter had
got his treasure, so that, if there happened to be any left, they could
go and get it. Then of course, they could kill the hunter and take his
treasure too.
Thus it came to pass that by a royal order the hunter was thrown into a
horrible prison, and told that his only hope of release lay in revealing
the origin of his riches. So, after he had been slowly starved and
cruelly beaten, he told of the treasure castle in the wood.
On the following morning, the King, the Chamberlain, and the Chancellor,
taking with them some strong linen bags and some pack mules, rode forth
in quest of the treasure. Great was their joy when they found the
treasure castle and the treasure room just as the hunter had described.
The Chancellor poured the shining gems through his claw-like fingers,
and the King and the Chamberlain threw their arms around each others'
shoulders and danced a jig as well as their age and dignity would
permit. The first fine careless rapture over, they began pouring the
treasure into the linen sacks they had brought with them, and these,
filled to the brim, they carried to the castle door.
Soon not the tiniest gem was left on the table. Suddenly the Chamberlain
happened to catch sight of the gems strewn along the floor.
"See, see!" he cried, his voice shrill and greedy. "There is yet more to
be had!"
So the three rogues got down on their hands and knees and began stuffing
the stray jewels into their bulging pockets. The trail of jewels led
them across the hall to the little door opening on the stairway, and up
this stairway they scrambled as fast as they could go.
At the top of the stair, in the turret, they found another round room
lit by three narrow, barred windows, and in the centre of this turret
chamber, likewise laden with gold and jewels, they found another ebony
table. With shrieks of delight, the King and the Chancellor and the
Chamberlain ran to this second treasure, and plunged their hands in the
glittering golden mass.
Suddenly, a great bell rang in the castle, a great brazen bell whose
deep clang beat about them in throbbing, singing waves.
"What's that?" said the three rogues in one breath, and rushed together
to the door.
It was locked! An instant later there was a heavy explosion which threw
them all to the floor, tossing the treasure over them; and then, wonder
of wonders, the castle turret, with the three rogues imprisoned in it,
detached itself from the rest of the castle, and flew off into the air.
From the barred windows, the King, the Chamberlain, and the Chancellor
saw league upon league of the forest rushing by beneath them. Suddenly
the flying room began to descend swiftly, and landed lightly as a bird
in the middle of a castle courtyard. Strange-looking fellows with human
bodies and heads of horses came rushing toward the enchanted turret, and
seized its prisoners. In a few moments they were brought before the King
to whom the treasure belonged.
Now this King was a brother of the dwarf whom the hunter had rescued
from the pit. He had a little gold crown on his head, and sat on a
little golden throne with cushions of crimson velvet.
"With what are these three charged?" said the Dwarf-King.
"With having tried to rob the treasure castle, Your Majesty," replied
one of the horse-headed servitors in a firm, stable tone.
"Then send for the Lord Chief Justice at once," said the Dwarf-King.
The three culprits were left standing uneasily in a kind of cage. They
would have tried to speak, but every time they opened their mouths, one
of the guards gave them a dig in the ribs.
For a space of five minutes there was quiet in the crowded throne-room,
a quiet broken now and then by a veiled cough or the noise of shuffling
feet. Presently, from far away, came the clear, sweet call of silver
trumpets.
"He's coming! He's coming!" murmured many voices. A buzz of excitement
filled the room. Several people had to be revived with smelling salts.
The trumpets sounded a second time. The excitement increased.
The trumpets sounded a third time, near at hand. A man's voice announced
in solemn tones, "The Lord Chief Justice approaches."
The audience grew very still. Hardly a rustle or a flutter was heard.
Suddenly the great tapestry curtains which overhung the door parted, and
there appeared, first of all, an usher, clad in red velvet and carrying
a golden wand; then came two golden-haired pages, also clad in red
velvet and carrying a flat black-lacquer box on a velvet cushion. Last
of all came an elderly man dressed in black, and carrying a golden perch
on which sat a fine green parrot. On reaching the centre of the hall,
the parrot flapped its wings, arranged an upstart feather or two, and
then resumed that solemn dignity for which birds and animals are so
justly famous.
With great ceremony the gentleman in black placed the Lord Chief Justice
on a lacquer stand close by the throne of the Dwarf-King.
Trumpets sounded. Two servitors hurried forward with the captive King.
"Your Venerability," spoke the Dwarf-King to the parrot, who watched him
intently out of its round yellow eye, and nodded its head, "this rascal
has been taken in the act of robbing the treasure castle. What
punishment do you suggest?"
At these words, the two golden-haired pages, advancing with immense
solemnity, lifted the lacquer box to within reach of the parrot's beak.
The box was full of cards. Over them, swaying from one leg to the other
as he did so, the parrot swept his head.
An icy silence fell over the throng. The King, the Chancellor, and the
Chamberlain quaked in their shoes. Presently the parrot picked out a
card, and the gentleman in black handed it to the Dwarf-King.
"Prisoner," said the Dwarf-King to the other King, "the Lord Chief
Justice condemns you to be for the rest of your natural life Master
Sweeper of the Palace Chimneys."
Discreet applause was heard. The Chancellor was then hurried forward,
and the bird picked out a second card.
"Prisoner," said the Dwarf-King, "the Lord Chief Justice condemns you to
be for the rest of your natural life Master Washer of the Palace
Windows."
More discreet applause was heard. And now the Chamberlain was brought to
the bar. The parrot gave him quite a wicked eye, and hesitated for some
time before drawing a card.
"Prisoner," said the Dwarf-King, reading the card which the parrot had
finally chosen, "the Lord Chief Justice condemns you for the rest of
your natural life to be Master Beater of the Palace Carpets."
Great applause followed this sage judgment.
So the three rogues were led away, and unless you have heard to the
contrary, they are still making up for their wicked lives by enforced
diligence at their tasks. The palace has five hundred and ninety-six
chimneys, eight thousand, seven hundred and fifty-three windows, and
eleven hundred and ninety-nine large dust-gathering carpets, and the
chimneys, windows, and carpets have to be swept, washed, and beaten at
least once a week.
Now when the King, the Chancellor, and the Chamberlain failed to return,
the people took the hunter out of his prison and made him king, because
he was the richest and most powerful of them all.
As for the treasure of the treasure castle, it is still there, packed in
the linen sacks, lying just inside the great door.
Perhaps some day you may find it. If you do, don't be greedy, and don't
go up to the turret chamber.
     PRINCE SNEEZE
[Illustration: In a cave filled with icicles, a small dog and a giant
are looking into an open chest.]
Once upon a time a king and a queen gave a magnificent party in honor of
the christening of their new-born son, Prince Rolandor. To this party
the royal parents took good care to invite every single fairy in
Fairyland, for they knew very well the unhappy consequences of
forgetting to invite fairies to christenings. When all the invitations
had been sent out, the Queen went down to the kitchen to superintend the
cooking of the master-dainty of the feast, a huge strawberry-tart.
The morning on which the grand ceremony was to take place arrived. At
half-past ten the Court Astrologer, who was master of ceremonies, gave
the order to form in line; and at ten minutes to eleven the splendid
procession started for the church. The road was lined with the King's
vassals shouting, "Hurrah, hurrah!" Countless little elves with gauzy
wings watched from the branches of the trees; and the great cathedral
bells went clang, bang, clang, as merrily as could be.
Just behind the royal body-guard came the King's gold-and-diamond coach
shining in the sunlight of June, with the King and the Queen in it on
one side and the Court Astrologer and the fairy Titania, prospective
godparents of the little Prince, on the other. The Prince himself,
swathed in a wonderful silk mantle edged with pearls and turquoises,
slept in the Astrologer's arms.
The procession entered the church, where the venerable Lord Archbishop,
surrounded by a magnificent choir, was awaiting its coming. A hush went
over the great assembly as the parents and the godparents advanced to
the flower-decked font, and the silence lasted until His Eminence had
sprinkled the Prince and given him the name of Rolandor. Then the bells
rang again, the organ roared so that the windows shook in their
casements, and the choristers sang like birds on a summer afternoon.
The christening over, the procession went back to the castle, past the
waiting rows of bystanders, not one of whom had changed his place or
gone away, so superb had been the spectacle.
The christening banquet was laid in the great hall of the castle, and,
thanks to the Court Astrologer, things went off beautifully. It was the
only large banquet ever known in the history of the world where courses
were served all at one time, and while one person was finishing an ice,
another was not beginning with the soup. Nor was the menu mixed, which
happens so frequently to-day that you are apt to have soup, ice, cake,
roast, soup, and a roast again. No, from soup to ice the banquet was a
huge success; but, alas, disaster came with the strawberry-tart.
As the Queen was chatting with the Lord Chancellor of the Enchanted
Islands, she happened to notice--for like a good hostess she had been
keeping an eye to the comfort of her guests--that nobody on the
right-hand side of the hall had been served with strawberry-tart. Almost
at the same moment, the chief cook, looking rather pale and worried,
bustled through the throng and whispered in her ear, "Your Majesty, the
strawberry-tart has given out!"
The Queen turned pale. At length she managed to ask in a weak voice,
"Have you plenty of other pastries?"
"Yes, Your Majesty," replied the cook.
"Then let them be served at once."
The cook withdrew, and the Queen, though somewhat shaken, took up the
conversation again. Ten minutes passed, and she was beginning to forget
her start, when a voice, rising clear and rasping over the hubbub of the
hall, said suddenly, "Where's my piece of strawberry-tart?"
Everybody turned toward the speaker, an elderly fairy from the Kingdom
of the Black Mountains, named Malvolia. She stood up in her place, her
arms akimbo, glowering at her plate, on which an attendant had just
deposited a small chocolate eclair.
"Where's my piece of strawberry-tart?" she repeated.
The Queen rose. "I am very sorry, Madam Malvolia," said she in her
sweetest voice, "but the strawberry-tart has given out."
"Hoity-toity," answered Malvolia rudely; "you mean that you only baked
enough for your own personal friends."
At this several guests cried, "Sh! Sh!" and the King began to look
worried.
"We will send for some at once," announced His Majesty.
"Oh yes,--strawberry-tart baked by the Queen's own hands for her own
dear friends," said Malvolia sneeringly; "but for me, a fairy of age and
distinction, an ordinary, low baker's eclair. The Kingdom of the Black
Mountains has been deliberately insulted in my person!"
"No, no, no, no!" cried the King and the Queen. "We assure you, madam,
that it was a simple mischance."
"Pish and tush!" replied Malvolia, who, like a great many people,
secretly enjoyed feeling herself aggrieved. "I consider the affair an
affront, a deliberate affront. And you shall pay dear for this
humiliation," she screamed, quickly losing control of her temper. "Every
time the Prince sneezes something shall change until--"
At this very moment, alas, a northeast wind blew gustily through the
open windows of the hall, shaking the tapestries from the walls, and
carrying away the last of Malvolia's sentence. The angry fairy turned
herself into a great black raven and flew, cawing hoarsely, over the
heads of the banqueters and out of the window with the wind.
A baby's cry was heard, and the King and the Queen rushed panic-stricken
to where their little son lay in his cradle on a raised platform at the
head of the hall. The little Prince's fat, pink face was twisted into
dreadful lines; he opened his mouth wide several times and half closed
it again; then, opening it wider than ever, he sneezed a terrible
sneeze.
There came a loud clap of thunder. When the confusion was over, the
Court Astrologer was found to have turned into an eight-day clock, with
a sun, moon, and stars arrangement, a planetary indicator, and a
calendar calculated for two thousand years. The banquet ended rather
gloomily, although the gifts of the other fairies, such as health,
wealth, and beauty, managed to make everyone a little more cheerful.
When the guests were gone, the King and Queen sent for Doctor Pill, the
court physician, to consult him in regard to the measures which ought to
be taken to prevent the Prince's sneezing. As for the poor Court
Astrologer, he was hung up in the sacristy of the cathedral, and every
eight days his wife wound him up, with tears.
"What shall we do, doctor?" asked the King rather mournfully.
"The Prince must be preserved from the things which cause sneezing,"
said the doctor sagely.
"Such as draughts?" suggested the King.
"Draughts, head-colds, snuff, and pepper," answered the leech. "Let his
little highness be put into a special suite of rooms; admit no person to
them until he has been examined for head-cold, and has put on germ-proof
garments; and as his little highness grows older, forbid the use of
pepper in his food. Better still, if Your Majesty has a castle in the
mountains, let the Prince be taken there for the sake of the purer air."
"There is the tower on the Golden Mountain," said the King.
At this the Queen began to weep again, for she, quite naturally, did not
wish to part with her child.
"But, my dear, we can't have him sneezing, and things changing all the
time," said the King.
"I beg Your Majesty to consider the danger of a head-cold," put in the
doctor.
"Yes, think of the danger of a head-cold," echoed the King, who saw
clearer than the Queen the chaos that might result if the Prince was
attacked by a prolonged fit of sneezing. "People with head-colds may
sneeze ten or fifteen times a day."
"Or fifty," said the doctor.
"Or fifty," echoed the King again, shaking his head, for he was torn
between paternal love and kingly duty. "Imagine fifty enchantments in a
day! By eventide the whole kingdom would be upset, undone, and the
people plotting a revolution."
"The tower on the Golden Mountain is in a fine healthful locality," said
the doctor, "and the Prince could be brought up as happily there as in
the palace."
So at length the Queen consented. In a few days the little Prince, who
had not sneezed a second time, was removed to the tower on the Golden
Mountain. His room, designed by Doctor Pill, was completely protected
from draughts, and every breath of air that entered it was
tri-bi-sterilized. Mrs. Pill, who had been a hospital nurse, took care
of him. Three times a week, on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, his
royal parents rode out to the tower, and after putting on germ-proof
garments, were admitted to the nursery of their infant son.
And so the years went by. Nobody was found able to break Malvolia's
spell, and the clue to its undoing had been carried away by the wind.
Malvolia herself had disappeared.
The Prince became a handsome little boy. Accomplished teachers taught
him history, music, drawing, dancing, and all the other things that a
prince ought to know. But of real life he knew almost nothing at all.
His most faithful friend during these lonely years was a French poodle,
who spoke both French and English exceedingly well. Of course, he had a
marked canine accent, rather growling his g's and howling the aw's and
the ow's, but his words were well chosen and his vocabulary extensive.
Never was seen a more friendly, wise, and devoted animal.
When the King decided to have him sent away for a while, for he feared
that his son was getting a touch of Poldo's barky manner of speaking,
from too close an association, the little Prince became really ill from
grief, and the King was forced to alter his decision.
During his imprisonment in the tower, in spite of all precautions, the
Prince sneezed three times. At the first sneeze, all the dogs in the
kingdom except Poldo changed into cats, and all the cats into dogs.
Though this was not a serious trouble, the change was certainly
inconvenient. All the dog-cats came out meowing at people as the dogs
used to bark at them, and they chased people down the street; the
cat-dogs, on the other hand, stayed in the kitchen under the stove, and
watched for mice in the pantry. Great St. Bernards might be seen licking
their paws and rubbing them over their foreheads, and fat, old
cat-lap-dogs used to try to purr.
At the second sneeze, all the elderly gentlemen over seventy changed
into elm trees, a proceeding that caused a terrible lot of trouble.
At the third sneeze, all the people in the pictures at the Art Museum
became alive, and for a week the soldiers of the royal guard spent most
of their time rescuing poor, bewildered fauns, satyrs, nymphs, Roman
senators, and long dead celebrities and historical personages from the
worst destitution. The King finally had to build a special castle for
As the Prince's twenty-first birthday drew near, he began to feel very
sad at the idea of having to stay shut up in the tower all his life.
Though he was a very brave and very manly young man, he lay down on his
couch and wept in sorrow.
Suddenly, standing with his forepaws on the coverlet, "Why do you weep,
dear master?" said the little dog.
"At my fate," replied the poor Prince. "I cannot bear to think that I
may have to spend all my days in this tower, and never see the great
wide world."
The poodle was silent for a few minutes. At length he said, "Dear Prince
Rolandor, do not give up hope. Have you ever thought of consulting my
old master, the Giant of the North Pole? He has a large chest in his
palace full of secrets which the winds have overheard, and perhaps the
key to Malvolia's spell is among them. If you will have a warm fur coat
and four fur boots made for me, I will go to the Giant and ask him."
The Prince gave his consent, and on the next day the royal tailor made
the poodle a magnificent sealskin coat and four splendid fur-lined
boots. Then the King wished him good speed, the Queen cried over him,
and the Prince, who could see from his high tower every corner of the
kingdom, watched him till he disappeared over the hills and far away.
Straight north the poodle ran. Soon he had left the fertile plains
behind him, and entered great, black pine forests where never a road was
to be seen. The cold wind howled through the trees, and at night the
brilliant stars sparkled over the dark and waving branches. Hungry
wolves and savage bears often pursued him, but somehow he always managed
to escape them all. At the end of the forest he found the frozen ocean
lit by the shuddering light of the aurora, flashing in a great fan from
east to west. Past white-tusked walruses and sleepy penguins he flew,
till on the eleventh day he saw the green, icy pinnacles of the Giant's
palace against the waving curtain of the Polar lights. On the evening of
the twelfth day he entered the castle.
The Giant of the North Pole was a tall, strong, yellow-haired fellow
wearing a crown of ice and a great sweeping mantle made from the white
fur of the polar bear. His servants were the Gusts,--strange, supple,
shadowy creatures moving quickly  to and fro,--and his courtiers were
the whirlwinds and the storms. The Giant's wife sat by his side; she had
dark hair and eyes of icy, burning blue.
"Welcome, little Poldo," said the Giant; and his voice sounded like the
wind in the treetops; "what seek you here?"
"I seek some words of the Fairy Malvolia which were carried away by the
northeast wind at Prince Rolandor's christening," replied the poodle.
"Whew, oo-oo," whistled the Giant of the North Pole. "If I have them,
the words are yours."
He summoned two Gusts to bring forth the chest of secrets. It was made
of black stone; and edged with diamonds of ice. In it were stored all
the mysteries which the wind had ever overheard; there were secrets,
confessions, vows, merry laughs, and simple words. And sure enough, in
the corner of the chest lay the rest of Malvolia's spell--a row of
little, old-fashioned, dusty words; the words: "Until he finds someone
brave enough to marry him."
So the good poodle learned the words by heart, thanked the Giant, and
hurried home with the message. When he came to the King's palace, he
ran, barking with joy, right into the King's own room. There he saw the
unhappy parents.
"Have you found the last of the sentence?" cried the Queen.
"Yes," said Poldo. "The spell will end when the prince marries."
That very evening the King and the Queen sent forth ambassadors to ask
for the hand of the loveliest princess of all Fairyland, Princess Adatha
of the Adamant Mountains. But so afraid was Adatha of being turned into
something else, that she refused the offer.
The King and the Queen then made a request for the hand of Princess
Alicia of the Crystal Lakes. But Alicia also was afraid of being turned
into something else, and she too refused the alliance. So did the
Princess of the Golden Coasts, the Princess of the Seven Cities, and
many others. Finally the only princess left in all Fairyland was a
princess who herself lay under an enchantment. A jealous witch had
turned her golden hair bright blue, and given her a nose a foot long.
This unhappy maiden was the only princess willing to accept poor
Rolandor.
The wedding day arrived. The Prince, though perhaps a little pale from
his confined life, looked very handsome, and led his ugly bride to the
altar like a man. Just exactly as the marriage ceremony was half over, a
spasm contorted the muscles of the Prince's face; the poor young man
felt strongly inclined to sneeze. Though he could be seen making heroic
efforts to control the impulse, the audience got very nervous and
panicky.
All was in vain! The Prince sneezed, "Ker choo!" A terrific clap of
thunder rent the air, and everybody looked about to see what had
happened.
The effect of the sneeze was an odd one. As it had occurred exactly at
the moment when the Prince was half-married, the spell had reacted upon
itself. "Just like a kick from a gun," Dr. Pill said next day.
The cats became dogs again, and the dogs became cats; the elm trees
became cross, elderly gentlemen looking for their families; the poor,
excited Roman senators, fauns, nymphs, satyrs, celebrities and
historical personages, went back to their pictures; and to cap the
climax, the ugly bride became once more her sweet and lovely self.
While everybody was cheering, who should walk out of the sacristy but
the Court Astrologer! An instant later, he had fallen into the
affectionate arms of the faithful wife who had wound him up for
twenty-one years.
After the wedding reception, the Prince and his bride went on a
honeymoon to the Enchanted Islands. As for Poldo the poodle, he was
created Prime Minister and lived to a fine old age.
     MARIANNA
[Illustration: Young girl sitting on tree trunk; a small bird is perched
on her left hand; a small bottle is fastened to her belt.]
Once upon a time a wicked nobleman rose in rebellion against his
rightful king, and taking the royal forces by surprise, defeated them
and seized the kingdom. The dethroned King, who had been severely
wounded in battle, was cast in prison, where he soon died; but his
widow, the Queen, managed to escape from the palace before the usurper
could lay hands upon her.
Into the dark forest which lay behind the palace ran the Queen, holding
her baby daughter in her arms. It was winter time, and a heavy snow had
hidden the foot-paths and the roads. Presently the Queen realized that
she was lost. All afternoon, however, she trudged bravely on through the
silence and the cold, her heart sinking as mile after mile revealed no
sign of a house or a shelter.
But late in the afternoon, when the red shield of the sun could scarcely
be seen through the tangle of the wild wood-branches, she perceived a
light coming from a little grove of cedars by the shore of a frozen
lake. The Queen made her way toward this light, and discovered a little
thatched hut in the silent wood; it was the house of one of the dwarfs
of the forest. The dwarf took pity on the Queen, but his efforts were
vain, for the poor woman was so weak and exhausted that she died without
telling the dwarf anything about herself or the child she carried.
So the little dwarf, who was a good, kind old fellow, brought the little
girl up as if she were his own child. His brother, the dwarf of the
mountain, made her the prettiest red-leather shoes, and his cousins, the
dwarfs of the pines, made the little girl dresses from cloth woven on
fairy looms.
Now, on the night her mother brought her to the hut, the little girl was
wearing a golden heart-shaped locket, with a crown and the letter M upon
it in diamonds. So the dwarf called the little girl Marianna.
Seventeen years passed, and Marianna grew to be quite the loveliest lass
in all the world. Her hair was as black as the raven's wing, her eyes
were as blue as the midsummer sea, and her skin was fair as the petal of
a rose. One spring morning a little yellow bird flew into the cedar
grove, and gave the dwarf a letter which it held in its beak.
The dwarf read the letter, and said to Marianna, "Little Marianna, the
Emperor of the Elves has bidden me come to the great assembly of the
dwarfs which is to be held next year on the Golden Mountain. Alas, what
are we to do? I can not take you with me, dear child, for it is
forbidden on pain of death to bring mortals to the assembly, nor can I
leave you here in this lonely wood."
To this Marianna replied, "Do not fear, dear father. Give me but yon
crystal flask of the water of healing, and I shall go forth into the
world until it is time for you to return again. Perhaps I shall discover
somebody who can tell me the meaning of this locket, or the history of
my dear mother."
So the dwarf took his knotted staff, and went away over hill, over dale
to the Golden Mountain.
Then Marianna took the crystal flask of the water of healing, and walked
boldly out of the wood into the wide, wide world. It was the middle of
the spring, the ice and snow had all disappeared; the trees were putting
forth their leaves, and there were clusters of primroses by the
roadside. In the swaying, rustling heart of a great elm tree, a little
thrush was singing. Through cities and towns went lovely Marianna,
bringing good cheer to the helpless and the sick, and curing all who
came to her, rich and poor, with the wonderful water of healing. But
never did she find anybody who could tell her about the gold heart with
the diamond crown.
Now it came to pass that, as Marianna was one day walking through a
village in the heart of the Adamant Mountains, a ragged old woman
besought her with tears to come to a hamlet which stood at the head of a
high and dangerous path. Touched by the old woman's supplication,
Marianna followed her to the hamlet, and found in a wretched hut, lying
on a wretched bed, a beautiful young peasant girl dying of a fever. So
Marianna touched the girl with the water of healing, and in an instant
she became well and strong.
"Dear lady," said the peasant girl, pressing Marianna's hand to her
lips, "how sweet and kind thou art! Great is the debt I owe thee."
And as the girl poured out her thanks, Marianna heard a faint "chirp,
chirp," and looking down, beheld a little yellow bird crouching on the
hearthstone. Every now and then he hid his head under his wings and
cried unhappily. It was the yellow bird which had brought the message
from the Emperor of the Elves.
"Poor little bird," said Marianna, bending down and taking him up in her
hands, "why criest thou so mournfully? Who hath done thee harm?"
But the bird uttered only a forlorn little cry, and hid his head again
under his wings.
"I found him on the rocks at the mountaintop yesterday," said the
mother. "Someone has wounded him. His wing is broken."
And she put the bird on the floor of the house and bade Marianna watch
how he fluttered trailing a wing in the dust. Again Marianna stooped,
and picking up the bird, touched the wounded wing with the water of
healing. Scarcely had she done so, when the yellow bird burst into a
joyous and golden song, and flying to the window, beat madly against the
panes. Then the peasant girl threw open the casement, and the yellow
bird flew out into the streaming sun.
"He is gone forever," said the peasant girl.
"Nay, he returns," said Marianna, gently, as the yellow bird flew back
and perched in the sheltering bower of Marianna's arms. Then,
accompanied by the peasant girl and the yellow bird, who flew singing
before her, Marianna went down the dangerous path to the high road in
the valley. When they reached the foot of the path, the peasant girl
cried:--
"Farewell, dear Marianna; may it some day be mine to repay thee!"
Into the world again went Marianna, and with her went the yellow bird.
Presently she came to the fairest land which she had ever seen, a land
of rolling fields, little hills, and rivers bordered with pale willow
trees. This pleasant land, unknown to Marianna, was part of her father's
kingdom, and she was really its queen because her father had been the
last rightful king.
Now while Marianna had been in the forest, the wicked nobleman who had
stolen the kingdom from Marianna's father had died, leaving his brother
Garabin in charge of the kingdom and of the interests of his little son,
Prince Desire. This Garabin, however, taking advantage of the youth and
helplessness of his nephew, had himself assumed the state and airs of
king. For some time he had enjoyed undisturbed the possession of his
stolen throne; but as Desire grew taller and stronger every year,
Garabin began to fear the day when he would be compelled to resign in
favor of his nephew.
When the Prince reached his twentieth year, Garabin would certainly have
killed him openly had he dared; but, fearing the people, he resolved to
use secret methods, and bribed a cruel magician to afflict poor Desire
with a deadly and mysterious malady. Of this malady, Desire was slowly
dying, for no medicine could cure him or even give him any relief from
his constant pain. Every morning the cruel Garabin, in the hope of
finding his nephew dead, would go to the sick room; and you may be sure
that his wicked heart rejoiced when he found the Prince weaker and more
feverish.
Garabin had just returned from a visit to the Prince, who was rapidly
failing, when the Captain of the Castle Guard came to him with the news
that the wonderful Marianna had arrived in the kingdom. The King gave
orders that she be brought before him. So Marianna, walking between two
halberdiers and followed across the courtyard by crowds of curious
people, was led before the King. The little yellow bird sat on
Marianna's shoulder, and never did maiden appear lovelier or more
gentle.
Scarcely had Garabin set eyes on Marianna, when he caught sight of the
golden locket which she wore about her neck. Had he not been very old
and crafty, he would have started from his golden throne, for he knew
that the little golden heart set with diamonds had been one of the crown
jewels, and that therefore Marianna must be the missing Princess, and
rightful queen of the kingdom.
What was he to do? If he refused to let Marianna help the Prince, the
people might begin to suspect him, and start a revolution which would
thrust him from his throne; if he allowed Marianna to cure the Prince,
the Prince would certainly demand the kingdom on his twenty-first
birthday. What was he to do with Marianna, whose right to the throne was
superior even to his nephew's? Perplexed, and with fear in his heart,
the King sought the cruel magician who had cast the spell on Desire.
The magician lived in a gloomy tower, and had an enchanted black dog
that he fed with flaming coals. He listened to Garabin's story, stirring
a great cauldron all the while, and said, "Do not fear. I will destroy
both claimants to the throne at once."
Garabin rubbed his hands together with glee.
"To-night I shall cast a spell of sleep on Marianna, steal the crystal
flask, empty it of the water of healing, and refill it with a liquid
which will cause death within a night and a day. I shall then replace
the flask before Marianna wakes. You will allow Marianna to visit the
Prince; she will touch him with the deadly water, and the Prince will
die. You can then try Marianna for having killed the Prince, and condemn
her to be thrown from the precipice."
So pleased was Garabin with this horrid plot, that he could have danced
for joy. That very night, the magician filled Marianna's flask with the
poisonous water, and departed, thinking that nobody had noticed him. The
yellow bird, however, had seen everything, and followed the magician to
note where he hid the real water of healing.
The next morning Marianna was once more led before the King.
"Welcome, thrice welcome, lovely maiden," said Garabin with the most
dreadful hypocrisy. "I have long hoped that you would turn your
footsteps hither, for my poor dear nephew, Prince Desire, only son of
the late King, has been ill for some months of a malady no physician can
cure. Perhaps you can cure him with the water of healing."
Marianna replied that she would do her best to help the Prince; so the
Court Chamberlain gave her his arm, and escorted her to the Prince's
sick room. The King and many courtiers followed after him.
Desire lay in a great old-fashioned bed, his face flushed with fever. So
weak was the poor Prince, that he could scarcely lift his head to look
at his visitors. A great pity swept over Marianna's heart the instant
she saw him; as for Desire, he fell madly in love with Marianna at first
sight.
Now just as Marianna bent over the Prince to touch his forehead with the
water of healing, the yellow bird screamed and cried as madly as if he
were caught in a net. Marianna looked at the crystal flask. Nothing
seemed changed; the water within seemed as pure and diamond-like as
ever. She touched the Prince with the liquid. Alas, in a moment, so
terrible was the magician's poison that the Prince turned white as the
driven snow, and fell back on the pillows insensible. The lookers-on,
who had expected to see him spring up entirely cured, began to murmur,
and Marianna herself, terrified at what had happened, let fall the
flask, which broke into a thousand sparkling pieces.
Suddenly, Garabin cried at the top of his voice, "Seize the witch; she
has killed the Prince!"
Presently there was a great confusion, rough hands seized Marianna, and
somebody caught the yellow bird. The Prince remained insensible on the
bed. At high noon, a trial was held, and since the doctors declared that
the Prince was dying, Marianna was condemned to be thrown from the
precipice. When somebody asked about the yellow bird, Garabin laughed,
and gave orders that the cook should wring its neck, and toss it to the
cat.
So Marianna was hurried to a dark prison-room and loaded with chains,
and the yellow bird was taken to the castle kitchen, and given to the
cook.
"Here, you wring its neck," said the cook to one of her helpers, "while
I go call the cat."
By great good fortune, the cook's helper was no other than the peasant
girl whom Marianna had saved. This girl recognized the yellow bird, and
instead of wringing its neck, let it fly out of the window. The yellow
bird flew to the window of the magician's room. The magician was in the
chamber, stirring the giant cauldron. The bird flew to the window of
Prince Desire's room, and saw that he was still insensible.
An hour later the castle-bell began to toll, and a dismal procession was
seen walking from the castle toward the frightful cliff from which
condemned witches and sorcerers were thrown. First came a troop of
soldiers, then Marianna, weighted down with chains, and last of all, a
little group in which were Garabin, the magician, and some of Garabin's
favorites.
The bell kept on sadly tolling and tolling. It roused the Prince from
his swoon, and with his last measure of strength, poor Desire dragged
himself to the window. The procession was then passing directly
underneath the window, and Desire's eyes met the eyes of Marianna.
"Stop! Stop!" cried the poor Prince, wildly; "I forbid--"
An instant later he sank fainting to the floor. The procession went on.
Meanwhile the yellow bird had returned to the magician's chamber. It was
empty. With a joyous cry, the bird fluttered through the window-bars,
and discovered the phial into which the magician had poured the water of
healing. Clutching it in his claws, the bird flew once more to the
Prince's room. Desire still lay in a heap by the window, and over him
the yellow bird poured the contents of the phial.
The Prince sprang up, strong as a lion, seized his sword, and rushed
down to save Marianna. He arrived at the cliff just as the poor maiden
was about to be pushed off into space, and standing by her side, dared
anyone to lay hands upon her.
Garabin, seeing his precious plot miscarry, grew mad with rage.
"Seize them," cried he, "and toss them both over the precipice!"
So the soldiers rushed at Marianna and the Prince, intending to carry
out their wicked master's orders. But even as they did so, there came a
flash of flame and the little dwarf, Marianna's foster-father, took his
place beside the lovers.
"Cruel King!" cried the dwarf sternly, "and thou, wicked and perfidious
magician, the hour of thy punishment is at hand."
Immediately the sky grew black, the lightning crashed, and there arose a
terrible, howling wind. Three giant gusts drove fiercely by, the first
one blowing the King and the magician head-over-heels over the
precipice, the second carrying away the soldiers, and the third the
rascally favorites. When the sky cleared, only the dwarf, Marianna, and
Desire were left of the company.
"Marianna," said the little dwarf, "the Emperor of the Elves has told me
all your history, and it is thanks to him that I have returned in time,
with the storm at my heels. You, Marianna, are the rightful Queen of
this country."
"Dear Queen," said the honest and gallant Desire, "let me be the first
of your subjects to salute you." And he knelt before her, and humbly
kissed her hand.
"Nay, Prince," said the young Queen, answering the adoring look in her
lover's eyes, "your father took the kingdom; if I were you, I should
take the Queen."
Which was a bit forward, of course, but nobody minded that very much in
those fairy times.
So Desire and Marianna were married, and lived happily ever after. The
yellow bird went to the wedding, and when the ceremony was over rose
singing into the air, and flew joyously home to the land of the Elves.
     THE LOST HALF-HOUR
Once upon a time there was an old widow woman who had three sons: the
first two were clever enough, but the third, Bobo by name, was little
better than a silly simpleton. All his mother's scoldings and
beatings--and she smacked the poor lad soundly a dozen times a day--did
him no good whatever.
Now it came to pass that one morning Princess Zenza, the ruler of the
land, happened to pass by the cottage and heard Bobo being given a
terrible tongue-lashing. Curious as to the cause of all the noise, the
Princess drew rein, and summoned Bobo's mother to come near. On hearing
her story, it occurred to the Princess that so silly a lad might amuse
her; so she gave the mother a golden florin, and took poor silly Bobo
with her to be her page.
[Illustration: In the background, a castle; in the middle ground, a boy
throwing a spiny object into a dragon's mouth; in the foreground, a
frightened girl.]
  Just as the dragon's mouth was at, its widest ....
You may be sure that it did not take the wise folk at the castle long to
discover how great a simpleton had arrived. Courtiers, footmen, lackeys,
turnspits even, were forever sending him off on ridiculous errands. Now
he would be sent to find a white craw's feather or a spray of yellow
bluebells; now he was ordered to look for a square wheel or a glass of
dry water. Everybody laughed at him and made fun of him--that is,
everybody except little Tilda, the kitchen-maid. When poor Bobo used to
return from some wild-goose chase, tired out, mud-stained, and often
enough wet to the skin, instead of laughing, little Tilda would find him
a glass of warm milk, hang his coat by the fire to dry, and tell him not
to be such a simpleton again. Thus, after a while, Bobo learned to ask
Tilda's advice before going away on a wild-goose chase, and was in this
way saved from many a jest.
Tilda, the kitchen-maid, was as sweet and pretty as she was kind and
good. She was said to be the daughter of an old crane who had come to
the castle one day, asking for help.
One pleasant mid-summer morning, when Bobo had been nearly a year at the
castle, Princess Zenza overslept half an hour and did not come down to
breakfast at the usual time. When she did get up, she found her court
waiting for her in the castle gardens. As she came down the steps of the
garden terrace, the Princess looked up at the castle clock to see how
late she was, and said to her lady in waiting,--
"Dear me--why, I've lost half an hour this morning!"
At these words, Bobo, who was in attendance, pricked up his ears and
said,--
"Please, Your Highness, perhaps I can find it."
At this idea of finding a lost half-hour, the Princess laughed, and
found herself echoed by the company.
"Shall we send Bobo in search of the lost half-hour?" said the Princess
to the courtiers.
"Yes! Yes!" cried the courtiers. "Bobo shall look for the lost
half-hour."
"I'll give him a horse," said one. "I'll give him my old hat," said
another. "He can have an old sword I broke last week," said still
another.
And so, in less time than it takes to tell about it, poor simpleton Bobo
was made ready for his journey.
Before he left the castle, Bobo went down to the kitchen to say good-bye
to Tilda.
"What, off again?" said the little kitchen-maid. "Where are you going
"The Princess has lost a half-hour and I am going in search of it," said
Bobo, proudly. And he told how the Princess herself had commanded him to
seek the half-hour through the world, and promised to bring Tilda a
splendid present when he returned.
The good kitchen-maid said little, for she feared lest some misadventure
overtake the poor simpleton; but when the chief cook was not looking,
she tucked a fresh currant-bun into Bobo's pocket, and wished him the
best of good fortune.
So Bobo went to the castle gate, and mounted his horse, which stumbled
and was blind in one eye.
"Good-bye, Bobo," cried the assembled courtiers, who were almost beside
themselves with laughter at the simpleton and his errand. "Don't fail to
bring back the lost half-hour!"
So Bobo rode over the hills and far away. Every now and then he would
stop a passer-by and ask him if he had seen a lost half-hour.
The first person whom he thus questioned was an old man who was
wandering down the high road that leads from the Kingdom of the East to
the Kingdom of the West.
"A lost half-hour?" said the old man. "I've lost something much more
serious, I've lost my reputation. You have n't seen a lost reputation
lying about here, have you? It was very dignified and wore
tortoise-shell glasses."
But Bobo had to answer "No," and the old man wandered on again.
Another day the simpleton encountered a tall, dark, fierce kind of
fellow, who answered his polite question with a scream of rage.
"A half-hour," he roared. "No, I have n't seen your half-hour; I would
n't tell you if I had; what's more, I don't want to see it. I'm looking
for something I've lost myself. I've lost my temper. I lost it two years
ago at home, and have n't been able to find it anywhere since. Answer
me, you silly, have you seen a lost temper anywhere? It's about the size
of a large melon and has sharp little points."
On Bobo's answering "No," this dreadful person uttered so perfectly
awful a screech of rage, that Bobo's horse took fright and ran away with
him, and it was all that Bobo could do to rein him in three miles
farther down the road.
Still farther along, Bobo came to Zizz, the capital city of the Kingdom
of the Seven Brooks, and was taken before the King himself.
"A lost half-hour?" said the King. "No, I am quite sure it has not been
seen in my dominions. Would you mind asking, as you go through the
world, for news of my little daughter?" (Here the poor old King took out
a great green handkerchief and wiped his eyes.) "She was stolen by the
fairies on midsummer eve fifteen years ago. Find her, worthy Bobo, and
an immense reward will be yours."
So Bobo left the proud city of Zizz, and once again rode over the hills
and far away. But never a sign of the lost half-hour did he find,
although he asked thousands of people. His faithful white horse died,
and he continued his way on foot.
Three long years passed, and Bobo grew into a handsome lad, but remained
a simpleton still. Finally, after he had wandered all about Fairyland,
he came to the edge of the sea. Finding a ship moored in a little
harbor, Bobo asked the sailors if they had seen a lost half-hour.
"No," said the sailors, "but we are going to the Isles of Iron;
suppose you go with us. The lost half-hour may be there."
So Bobo went aboard the ship, and sailed out upon the dark sea.
For two days the weather was warm and clear, but on the third day, there
came a dreadful storm, and on the third night the vessel was driven far
off her course into the unknown ocean, and was wrecked upon a mysterious
island of rocks that shone in the night like wet matches. A great wave
swept the decks, and Bobo was borne away from his companions and carried
toward the shining land. Though pounded and battered by the foaming
waves, the simpleton at length managed to reach the beach, and took
refuge in a crevice of the cliff during the stormy night.
When the dawn broke, all sign of the ship had disappeared. Looking
about, Bobo found himself on a lovely island whose heart was a high
mountain mass hidden in the fog still sweeping in from the sea. There
was not a house, a road, or a path to be seen. Suddenly Bobo noticed a
strange little door in the bark of a great lonely tree, and, opening
this door, he discovered a little cupboard in which were a pair of
wooden shoes. Above the shoes was a card, saying simply,--
  PUT US ON.
So Bobo sat down on a stone by the foot of the tree, and put on the
wooden shoes, which fitted him very nicely. Now these shoes were magic
shoes, and Bobo had hardly stepped into them before they turned his feet
inland. So Bobo obediently let the shoes guide him. At corners the shoes
always turned in the right direction, and if Bobo forgot and blundered
on the wrong way, the shoes swiftly began to pinch his toes.
For two days Bobo walked inland toward the great mountain. A warm wind
blew the clouds and rain away, the sun shone sweet and clear. On the
morning of the third day, the simpleton entered a wood of tall silent
trees, and as that day was drawing to a close, turrets of a magnificent
castle rose far away over the leaves of the forest.
Bobo arrived at twilight.
He found himself in a beautiful garden, lying between the castle walls
and the rising slopes of a great mountain. Strange to say, not a living
creature was to be seen, and though there were lights in the castle,
there was not even a warder at the gate. Suddenly a great booming bell
struck seven o'clock; Bobo began to hear voices and sounds; and then,
before the humming of the bell had died away, a youth mounted on a
splendid black horse dashed at lightning speed out of the castle and
disappeared in the wood. An old man with a white beard, accompanied by
eleven young men, whom Bobo judged, from their expressions, to be
brothers,--stood by the gate to see the horseman ride away.
Plucking up courage, Bobo came forward, fell on his knee before the old
man, and told his story.
"Truly, you should thank the storm fairies," said the old man; "for had
you not been wrecked upon this island, never would you have discovered
the lost half-hour. I am Father Time himself, and these are my twelve
sons, the Hours. Every day, one after the other, they ride for an hour
round the whole wide world. Seven O'clock has just ridden forth. Yes,
you shall have the lost half-hour, but you must look after my sons'
horses for the space of a whole year."
To this Bobo willingly agreed. So Twelve O'Clock, who was the youngest
of the Hours, took him to the stables and showed him the little room in
the turret that he was to have. And thus for a year Bobo served Father
Time and his sons. He took such good care of the great black horses of
the Hours of the Night, and the white horses of the Hours of the Day,
that they were never more proud and strong, nor their coats smoother and
more gleaming.
When the year was up, Bobo again sought out Father Time.
"You have served faithfully and well," said Father Time. "Here is your
reward." And, with these words, he placed in Bobo's hands a small square
casket made of ebony. "The half-hour lies inside. Don't try to peek at it
or open the box until the right time has come. If you do, the half-hour
will flyaway and disappear forever."
"Farewell, Bobo," said kind young Twelve O'Clock, who had been the
simpleton's good friend. "I, too, have a gift for thee. Drink this cup
of water to the last drop." And the youth handed the simpleton a silver
cup full to the brim of clear shining water.
Now this water was the water of wisdom, and when Bobo had drunk it, he
was no longer a simpleton. And being no longer a simpleton, he
remembered the man who had lost his reputation, the man who had lost his
temper, and the king whose daughter had been stolen by the fairies. So
Bobo made so bold as to ask Father Time about them, for Father Time
knows everything that has happened in the whole wide world.
"Tell the first," said Father Time, "that his reputation has been broken
into a thousand pieces which have been picked up by his neighbors and
carried home. If he can persuade his neighbors to give them up, he
should be able to piece together a pretty good reputation again. As for
the man who lost his temper, tell him that it is to be found in the
grass by the roadside close by the spot where you first met him. As for
the missing daughter, she is the kitchen-maid in Princess Zenza's
palace, who is known as Tilda."
So Bobo thanked Father Time, and at noon, Twelve O'Clock placed him
behind him on the white charger, and hurried away. So fast they flew
that Bobo, who was holding the ebony casket close against his heart, was
in great danger of falling off. When they got to the seashore, the white
horse hesitated not an instant, but set foot upon the water, which bore
him up as if it had been, not water, but earth itself. Once arrived at
the shore of Fairyland, Twelve O'Clock stopped, wished Bobo good-speed,
and, rising in the air, disappeared into the glare of the sun. Bobo,
with the precious ebony casket in his hand, continued on in the
direction of Princess Zenza's palace.
On the second morning of his journey, he happened to see far ahead of
him on the highway the unfortunate aged man who had lost his reputation.
To him, therefore, Bobo repeated the counsel of Father Time, and sent
him hurrying home to his neighbors' houses. Of the man who had lost his
temper, Bobo found no sign. In the grass by the roadside, however, he
did find the lost temper--a queer sort of affair like a melon of fiery
red glass all stuck over with uneven spines and brittle thorns. Bobo,
with great goodness of heart, took along this extraordinary object, in
the hope of finding its angry possessor.
Farther on, the lad encountered Tilda's father, the unhappy King, and
delivered his message. The joy of the monarch knew no bounds, and Bobo,
the one-time simpleton, became on the spot Lord Bobo of the Sapphire
Hills, Marquis of the Mountains of the Moon, Prince of the Valley of
Golden Apples, and Lord Seneschal of the proud City of Zizz--in a word,
the greatest nobleman in all Fairyland. Then, having got together a
magnificent cohort of dukes, earls, and counts, all in splendid silks,
and soldiers in shining armor, the delighted King rode off to claim his
missing daughter from Princess Zenza.
So on they rode, the harnesses jingling, the bridle-bells ringing, and
the breastplates of the armed men shining in the sun. After a week of
almost constant progress (for the King was so anxious to see his beloved
daughter that he would hardly give the cavalcade time to rest), they
came to the frontiers of Princess Zenza's kingdom.
Strange to say, black mourning banners hung from the trees, and every
door in the first village which the travelers saw was likewise hung with
black streamers. On the steps of one of the cottages sat an old woman,
all alone and weeping with all her might.
"What is the matter, my good woman?" said the King.
"O sir," said the peasant woman, "evil days have fallen upon our unhappy
kingdom. Three days ago a terrible dragon alighted in the gardens of the
palace and sent word to Princess Zenza that if within three days she did
not provide him with someone brave enough to go home with him and cook
his meals and keep his cavern tidy, he would burn our fields with his
fiery breath. Yet who, I ask you, would be housekeeper for a dragon?
Suppose he did n't like the puddings you made for him--why, he might eat
you up! All would have been lost had not a brave little kitchen-maid
named Tilda volunteered to go. It is for her that we are mourning. At
two o'clock she is to be carried off by the dragon. It is almost two
now. Alas! Alas!"
Hardly were the words out of her mouth, when the town bell struck twice,
solemnly and sadly.
"Quick! quick!" cried the King and Bobo in the same breath, "Let us
hurry to the castle. We may save her yet."
But they knew in their hearts that they were too late, and that poor
Tilda had given herself to the dragon. And so it proved. In spite of his
mad dash, Bobo, who had spurred on ahead, arrived exactly half an hour
late. The monstrous dragon with Tilda in his claws was just a little
smoky speck far down the southern sky. Princess Zenza and her court
stood by wringing their jeweled hands.
Suddenly Bobo thought of the half-hour. He had arrived half an hour
late, but he could have that half-hour back again! Things should be
exactly as they were half an hour before.
He opened the cover of the ebony box. Something like a winged white
flame escaped from it, and flew hissing through the air to the sun. As
for the sun itself, turning round like a cartwheel and hissing like ten
thousand rockets, it rolled back along the sky to the east. The hands of
the clocks, which marked half-past two, whirred back to two o'clock in a
twinkling. And, sure enough, there was brave little Tilda standing alone
in a great field waiting for the dragon to come and take her away.
Lumbering heavily along like a monstrous turtle, and snorting blue
smoke, the dragon was advancing toward her.
Bobo ran down into the field and stood beside Tilda, ready to defend her
to the end.
The dragon came nearer and nearer. Suddenly, angered by the sight of
Bobo and his drawn sword, he roared angrily, but continued to approach.
Bobo struck at him with his sword. The blade broke upon his steely
scales. The dragon roared again. Now just as the dragon's mouth was its
widest, Bobo who had been searching his pockets desperately, hurled into
it the lost temper.
There was a perfectly terrific bang! as if a million balloons had blown
up all at once. For the dragon had blown up. The lost temper had
finished him. Only one fragment of him, a tiny bit of a claw, was ever
found.
Everybody, you may be sure, began to cry "Hurrah" and "Hooray," and soon
they were firing off cannon and ringing all the bells. Then Tilda's
father took her in his arms, and told her that she was a real princess.
The Grand Cross of the Order of the Black Cat was conferred upon Bobo by
Princess Zenza, who also asked his pardon for having treated him so
shabbily. This Bobo gave readily. A wonderful fete was held. When the
rejoicings were over, Bobo and Tilda were married, and lived happily
together all their days.
     THE ENCHANTED ELM
[Illustration: Young girl sitting in a tree.]
Once upon a time, while riding, a brave, young prince dashed merrily
ahead of his friends, and after galloping across a ploughed field,
turned his horse's head down a grassy road leading to a wood. For some
time he cantered easily along, expecting any moment to hear the shouts
and halloos of his friends following after; but they by mistake took
quite another road, and no sound except the pounding of his courser's
hoofs reached the Prince's ear. Suddenly an ugly snarl and a short bark
broke the stillness of the pleasant forest, and looking down, the Prince
saw a gray wolf snapping at his horse's heels.
Though the horse, wild with fear, threatened to run away any instant,
the Prince leaned over and struck the wolf with his whip.
Hardly had he done so, when an angry voice cried, "How dare you strike
my pet?"
A little distance ahead, a wicked old witch stood at one side of the
road. With its tail between its legs, the wolf cowered close to her
skirts, and showed its long yellow fangs.
"Pet, indeed!" cried the Prince. "Keep him away from my horse or I will
strike him again."
"At your peril, Prince," answered the witch. And then, as the Prince
turned his horse's head and galloped back, she called out, "You shall
rue this day! You shall rue this day!"
Now by the time the Prince had arrived at the ploughed field and the
great road again, his friends had galloped on so far that they were lost
to sight. Thinking that he might overtake them by following a shorter
road, he turned down a byway skirting the wood in which he had
encountered the enchantress. Presently he began to feel very thirsty.
Chancing to see an old peasant woman in the fields, the Prince called to
her and asked where he could find a roadside spring.
Now this old peasant woman was the wicked witch under another form.
Overjoyed at having the Prince fall so easily into her power, she
curtsied; and replied that within the wood was to be found the finest
spring in the country. Anxious not to lose time, the Prince begged her
to lead him to the water. Little did he know that the witch was leading
him back into the wood, and that she had just bewitched the water!
When they arrived at the pool, the Prince dismounted, and kneeling by
the brim, made a cup of his hands and drank till his thirst was
satisfied. He was just about to seize his horse again by the bridle and
put his foot into the stirrup, when a terrible pang shot through his
body, darkness swam before his eyes, his arms lengthened and became
branches, his fingers, twigs; his feet shot into the ground, and he
found himself turned into a giant elm.
A giant elm he was; a giant elm he remained. Unable to find him after a
long search, his friends gave him up for lost, and a new Prince ruled
over the land. Though the elm tried many times to tell passers-by of his
plight, none ever seemed to understand his words. Again and again, when
simple wood-cutters ventured into the great dark wood, he would tell
them his story and cry out, "I am the Prince! I am the Prince!" But the
wood-cutters heard only the wind stirring in the branches. Ah, how cold
it was in winter when the skies were steely black and the giant stars
sparkled icily! And how pleasant it was when spring returned, and the
gossipy birds came back again!
The first year a pair of wood-pigeons took to housekeeping in his
topmost branches. The Prince was glad to welcome them, for though denied
human speech, he understood the language of trees and birds. On
Midsummer Eve, the pigeons said to him, "To-night the King of the Trees
comes through the wood. Do you not hear the stir in the forest? All the
real trees are preparing for the King's coming; they are shedding dead
leaves and shaking out their branches."
"Tell me of the King," said the Prince.
"He is tall and dark and strong," said the doves. "He dwells in a great
pine in the North. On Midsummer Eve, he goes through the world to see if
all is well with the tree people."
"Do you think he can help me?" asked the Prince.
"You might ask him," replied the doves.
The long, long twilight of Midsummer Eve came to a close; night folded
the world beneath its starry curtains. At twelve o'clock, though not a
breath of air was stirring, the trees were shaken as if by a mighty
wind, the rustling of the leaves blending into strange and lovely music,
and presently the King of the Trees entered the haunted wood. Even as
the wood-doves had said, he was tall and dark and stately.
"Is all well with you, O my people?" said the King, in a voice as sweet
and solemn as the wind in the branches on a summer's day.
"Yes, all is well," answered the trees softly. Though some replied, "I
have lost a branch"; and a little tree called out unhappily, "My
neighbors are shutting out all my sunlight."
"Then fare ye well, my people, till next Midsummer Eve," said the
stately King. And he was about to stride onward through the dark wood
when the enchanted Prince called aloud to him!
"Stay, O King of the Trees," cried the poor Prince. "Hear me even though
I am not of your people. I am a mortal, a prince, and a wicked witch has
turned me into a tree. Can you not help me?"
"Alas, poor friend, I can do nothing," replied the King. "However, do
not despair. In my travels through the world, I shall surely find
someone who can help you. Look for me on next Midsummer Eve."
So the great elm swayed his branches sadly, and the King went on his
The winter came again, silent and dark and cold. At the return of
spring, a maiden who dwelt with a family of wood-cutters came often to
rest in the shade of the great tree. Her father had once been a rich
merchant, but evil times had overtaken him, and at his death the only
relatives who could be found to take care of the little girl were a
family of rough wood-cutters in the royal service. These grudging folk
kept the poor maiden always hard at work and gave her the most difficult
household tasks. The Prince, who knew the whole story, pitied her very
much, and ended by falling quite in love with her. As for the unhappy
maiden, it seemed to her that beneath the sheltering shade of the great
elm she enjoyed a peace and happiness to be found nowhere else.
Now it was the custom of the wood-men to cut down, during the summer,
such trees as would be needed for the coming winter, and one day the
wood-cutter in whose family the maiden dwelt announced his intention of
cutting down the great elm.
"Not the great elm which towers above all the forest?" cried the maiden.
"Yes, that very tree," answered the woodcutter gruffly. "To-morrow
morning we shall fell it to the ground, and to-morrow night we shall
build the midsummer fire with its smaller branches. What are you crying
about, you silly girl?"
"Oh, please don't cut the great elm!" begged the good maiden.
"Nonsense!" said the wood-cutter. "I wager you have been wasting your
time under its branches. I shall certainly cut the tree down in the
All night long, you may be sure, the maiden pondered on the best way to
save the great tree; and since she was as clever as she was good, she at
length hit upon a plan. Rising early on Midsummer Morn, she ran to the
forest, climbed the great elm, and concealed herself in its topmost
branches. She saw the rest of the wood beneath her, and the distant
peaks of the Adamant Mountains; and she rejoiced in the dawn songs of
the birds.
An hour after the sun had risen, she heard the voices of the wood-cutter
and his men as they came through the wood. Soon the band arrived at the
foot of the tree. Imagine the feelings of the poor Prince when he saw
the sharp axes at hand to cut him down!
"I shall strike the first blow," said the chief wood-cutter, and he
lifted his axe in the air.
Suddenly from the tree-top a warning voice sang,--
  "Throw the axe down, harm not me.
  I am an enchanted tree.
  He who strikes shall breathe his last,
  Before Midsummer Eve hath passed."
"There is a spirit in the tree," cried the woodcutters, thoroughly
frightened. "Let us hurry away from here before it does us a mischief."
And in spite of all the chief wood-cutter's remonstrances, they ran
away as fast as their legs could carry them.
The chief wood-cutter, however, was bolder-hearted, and lifted the axe
again. As the blade shone uplifted in the sun, the maiden sang once
more,--
  He who strikes shall breathe his last
Hearing the voice again, the chief began to feel just the littlest bit
alarmed; nevertheless, he stood his ground and lifted the axe a third
time. Once more the girl sang,--
At the same moment, the elm managed to throw down a great branch which
struck the rogue a sound thump on the shoulders. Now thoroughly
terrified, the chief wood-cutter himself fled from the spot.
All day long, for fear lest he return, the maiden remained hidden in the
tree. At twilight, overcome by weariness, she fell into a deep sleep.
Just before midnight, alas, she was awakened from her slumber by hearing
an angry voice cry,--
"Come down from the tree, wicked, deceitful girl, or I shall cut it down
at once!"
Very much alarmed, the poor maiden looked down through the branches, and
discovered the wood-cutter standing at the foot of the elm. A lantern
swung from his left hand, and his sharpest axe rested on his right
shoulder. He had returned home, and not finding the maiden there, had
suspected that it was her voice which had frightened his men away.
"Come down," roared the rascal. "I'll teach you, you minx, to play
tricks with me. One--two--three." And lifting the axe in the air, he was
about to send it crashing into the trunk of the elm, when the mysterious
murmur which heralded the coming of the King of the Trees sounded
through the wood. Perplexed and frightened again, the chief wood-cutter
let fall his axe. Presently he perceived two beings coming toward him
through the solemn forest. Uttering a howl of fear, the rogue would have
fled, but, lifting his wand, the elder of the newcomers transfixed him
to the spot. The two personages were the King of the Trees and his
friend, the mighty enchanter, Gorbodoc.
"Descend and fear not, maiden," said the King of the Trees. "You have
done bravely and well. Your misfortunes are over, and a happier day is
at hand."
So the brave girl hurried down the tree, and stood before the enchanter
and the King. Very pretty she was, too, in her rustic dress and ribbons.
Lifting his wand with great solemnity, Gorbodoc touched the trunk of the
elm. There was a blinding flash of rosy fire; the great tree appeared to
shrink and dissolve, and presently the Prince stood before them.
"Welcome, Prince," said the enchanter.
"Your enemy, the witch, will trouble you no more. I have turned her into
an owl and given her to the Queen of Lantern Land. As for you," and here
the enchanter turned fiercely upon the wood-cutter, "you shall be a
green monkey, until you have planted and brought to full growth as many
trees as you have cut down."
An instant later, a green monkey swung off into the tree-tops.
Then the grateful Prince thanked the King of the Trees, the mighty
Gorbodoc, and the brave maiden, with all his heart. I am glad to say
that he got his castle back again and married the maiden who had saved
his life, and they lived happily ever after.
     THE BIRD BOY
Late one autumn night a young queen stood by her window, gazing upon the
silent and deserted meadows gleaming in the moonlight. Suddenly, far,
far up in the sky, she heard the weird cry of birds flying southward,
and lifting her eyes, the Queen beheld bird after bird fly across the
golden shield of the moon.
"Oh, lovely, happy birds," said she; "would that I might have a son with
wings!"
Now it came to pass that before the harvest moon rose again over the
land, the Queen became the mother of a little boy who was born with
wings on his shoulders. But instead of being pleased with so strange and
wonderful a little son, the King (who was very superstitious and under
the domination of wicked chamberlain named Malefico) took it into his
head that his wife was a sorceress, and gave orders that she should be
imprisoned in a lonely tower and the child destroyed. So the Queen and
her baby were taken to an old and gloomy tower on a great rock
overlooking the northern sea; and after they had been there a day or
two, the chief jailer came to the Queen's room to take the child and
[Illustration: Foreground, small winged boy seat on the ground, approached
by a large bird in flight; background, small cottage.]
  Every year, on the Bird-Boy's birthday, a great gray bird was seen.
The Queen, when she heard this terrible order, uttered a gasping scream,
and seizing her little son from out his cradle, pressed him close to her
breast. But although she fought for her baby with all her might, the
rude strength of the jailers prevailed, and the child was torn from its
mother's arms. Then, before anyone could prevent her, the poor Queen
beat open the rotted fastening of an old casement window, sprang upon
the ledge, and giving one last look of love and tenderness to her
unhappy child, leaped down into the sea surging and pounding over the
rocks hundreds of feet below. She certainly would have been dashed to
pieces, had not a good spirit of the ocean taken pity on her, and
changed her into a great gray bird. Crying mournfully, the bird circled
the old tower thrice, and disappeared over the white-capped waters.
In spite of his roughness, however, the jailer was neither a brutal nor
a wicked man, and he did not relish the cruel task which the King had
given him. So, instead of killing the bird-boy, he carried him many
leagues back into the dark forest which bordered the sea, and gave him
to a family of charcoal-burners. With these rough, good people the
bird-boy lived till he was five years old. And every year, on the boy's
birthday, a great gray bird came flying over the forest from the distant
ocean, circled thrice the charcoal-burners' hut, and disappeared again,
crying mournfully.
One midsummer day, with a great deal of merry hallooing and blowing of
sweet-voiced horns, the King of the country, accompanied by his young
wife, came hunting through the wood. There was a pretty spring near the
door of the hut, and the party came to a halt at its edge. Out ran the
winged boy and his two little foster-brothers, to see the wonderful
sight. And a wonderful sight it was, indeed, to see the horses tossing
their jeweled bridles, the hooded falcons riding on the saddlebow,
clutching the leather with their curving claws, the merry young pages in
their dark suits, and all the gay company in rich attire.
"Why, see," said the young Queen to her husband, "yon little boy hath
wings. Really, dear, I must have him for my page. Would n't it be
wonderful to have a winged page? Besides, he will be a playmate for
Rosabella."
So the King gave the charcoal-burner and his wife fifty pieces of bright
gold, which pleased them very much, and the charcoal-burner himself
lifted the bird-boy up in his arms, and placed him on the King's saddle.
Then the bird-boy waved good-bye to his two little ragged
foster-brothers, who were howling as if their hearts would break, and
rode away with the King. In a few hours the company came to a splendid
castle of shining white stone, standing in beautiful green gardens
running down to the sea. Once at home, the Queen commanded that the
little winged boy be washed and tidied, and his charcoal-burner's rags
replaced with a pretty black velvet suit. You may be sure that, when the
bird-boy was washed and dressed, there was no handsomer, more winning
little boy in all the world.
So the bird-boy became the best beloved playmate of the Queen's only
child, her darling Rosabella. Now, if the bird-boy was the prettiest
little boy in all the world, Rosabella was the prettiest little girl.
Moreover, she had a sweet disposition, which is a gift even more
precious than the gift of beauty. It was a lovely picture to see the
children building toy castles on the floor of the nursery in the castle
tower, the sun streaming on the black-brown hair and silver white wings
of the little boy, and on the golden curls of Rosabella.
Twelve years passed. The bird-boy grew into a handsome lad; Rosabella
into the loveliest of princesses. Twice had the bird-boy saved
Rosabella's life. He had saved her the first time by swooping down and
catching her in his wings just as she was about to tread on a wicked
yellow viper; he had saved her in the same way when she had fallen over
a cliff at the edge of the sea.
Every year, on the bird-boy's birthday, a great gray bird would fly in
from over the sea, circle the castle thrice, and disappear, crying
Now when the bird-boy and Rosabella were in their seventeenth year, it
came to pass that the King was summoned to war. His enemy was no other
than the wicked chamberlain Malefico, who had succeeded to the kingdom
of the bird-boy's father, when that Prince had died some years before.
So the good King, who had been a real father to the bird-boy, put on his
shining armor, kissed his dear wife and child good-bye, and rode off to
the battlefield. The bird-boy begged and pleaded to be taken with him as
his squire, but the King would not hear of it, and insisted that he
remain in the castle to take care of the Queen and Rosabella. There was
little cheer in the castle that unhappy evening. And all night long, the
bird-boy thought he could hear the wings of a great bird beating
fiercely against the window-panes.
A month passed, an unhappy month in which there were no tidings from the
King. Then, one rainy morning, a messenger who had ridden so hard that
his poor horse could scarcely stagger, rode to the castle gate bearing
very evil news. A great battle had been fought, the army of Rosabella's
father had been completely defeated, and the troops of the wicked
Malefico were hurrying toward the castle as fast as they could come.
And so it was; for before the Queen had had time to summon the people
and gather together a few belongings, the troops of the enemy burst in
at the gate, and a dozen fierce soldiers surrounded the Queen,
Rosabella, and the bird-boy, and dragged them to Malefico.
When Malefico saw the bird-boy, a look of surprise appeared on his face,
for he had believed that the wonderful child was dead. Then he fell to
thinking, and as he thought, wicked purposes swept over his cruel face
just as the shadows of dark clouds sweep over a gloomy pool.
"If it were known that the winged child is alive," he thought, "the
people would thrust me from my place, and restore him to his father's
throne. Now that the bird-boy is in my hands, I will destroy him, and be
sure of my power."
So he smiled, and began to think of some manner in which he could bring
the bird-boy to a shameful end. At last he hit upon a plan. He would
declare that the bird-boy was not a human lad at all, but a witch-child;
he would then accuse the good King of having protected a witch-child,
and condemn them both to be stoned. So he threw the King and the Queen,
Rosabella and the bird-boy, into an old dungeon-tower, and went through
the mockery of having a trial. When it was over, he sent a soldier to
tell the King and the bird-boy that they were to be punished the
following day.
And now dawned the unhappy day. The bird-boy took Rosabella's hand in
his, and together they went to the barred window of the prison and
looked out upon the world. The morning was fresh and fair; a pleasant
southwest wind was blowing. The King and the bird-boy were to be led
forth at noon. The clock marked a quarter to twelve.
"Dear Rosabella," said the bird-boy sadly, "we have forgotten that
to-day is the day on which the great gray bird comes from the ocean and
circles the castle towers. If thou shouldst see the bird when I am gone,
greet it in my name, as we did when we were happy children."
"The bird may come," said Rosabella amid her sobs.
"No, Rosabella," said the bird-boy, "I shall never see the gray bird
again. And even if it were to come, what could it do to save us from
these cruel people?"
When the clock stood at five minutes to twelve, there was a confused
noise below, and Malefico and the judges who shared with him the guilt
of the unrighteous punishment took their places on a kind of platform
which overlooked the place of execution.
"They will soon be coming to get us," said the King to the bird-boy.
And sure enough, they heard the jangle of the jailer's keys at the foot
of the stair.
Suddenly the sunlight in the room faded swiftly into a strange gray
gloom, and the bird-boy rushed to the window to see if a storm was at
hand. A great shadowy cloud, advancing with inconceivable rapidity,
already filled half the sky, and as the boy gazed into this cloud, he
saw to his astonishment that it was not a cloud at all, but hundreds and
hundreds of thousands of great gray birds, flapping their long wings.
The shadow of the birds fell over the platform on which the cruel
Malefico sat waiting for the King and the bird-boy to be brought forth,
and then ceased moving even as a ship that has come into harbor.
Far ahead of the vast swarm flew one lonely bird, and suddenly this bird
uttered a shrill and piercing cry. Immediately every bird let fall a
great beach-stone which he held in his claws, and for a long minute, the
sky rained stones, round, polished stones that fell like bolts of
thunder. When the storm was over, and the cloud had begun to break into
rifts and speckles of light and flapping gray wings, the wicked Malefico
and his cruel nobles lay buried forever beneath mound upon mound of
stones. The doom which Malefico had intended for another had overtaken
The King and the Queen, Rosabella and the bird-boy, rushed down the
stairs and out into the sunlight. As they did so, the gray bird who had
led the cloud, sank through the air and alighted at their feet. But
scarcely had the bird's claws touched the ground, when there was a flash
of flame, and the bird-boy's mother stood before them. She took her son
in her arms, and told them all his history and her misfortunes, and how
she had watched over him year after year and gathered the birds to save
Thus it came to pass that, when the troops of Malefico saw their former
Queen and heard her story, they acclaimed the bird-boy as their rightful
king, and carried him back in triumph into his own country. So the
bird-boy became a king, married Rosabella, and lived happily ever after.
     THE MASTER MARINER
Once upon a time a fine young fisherman rose early in the morning, and
sailed alone to the fishing-grounds. There was very little wind, and
beneath the speckled clouds and the cold, pearly light of the late dawn,
the broad, low billows went slowly and unrippled to the land.
The fisherman cast anchor, and threw overboard his lines. Suddenly his
boat moved uneasily, and close to its side the oily surface of the pale
sea broke into a tumbling mass of foam. In the heart of the troubled
waters, the fisherman beheld, to his great astonishment, a man clad in a
strange garment of gleaming black scales, struggling with an enormous
scarlet fish. A battle of life and death they fought, the man of the sea
trying to stab the fish with a short dagger of shining steel, the fish
trying, wolf-like, to tear at the body of its enemy. Now, with a swift
lash of its bright scarlet body, the fish would rush at the man; now,
with a long sure stroke of his powerful arms, the man would escape the
attack. Suddenly, the fish hurled itself clear out of the water, and
falling against the man, struck him a terrible blow with its tail. Then
the ocean man, who was stunned for a moment, would have perished, had
not the young fisherman swiftly seized his spear and plunged deep into
the body of the fish. Mortally wounded, the scarlet creature sank
through the sunless waters, the dark blood flowing from its side.
The man of the sea clutched the rail of the boat with his webbed hands,
and said to the fisherman, "I am the King of the Caves of the Sea. I owe
you my life, and you shall have a reward. Take this little silver fish.
It will bring you good fortune; and should you ever be in deadly peril,
you have but to cast it into the sea, and it will come and find me."
The fisherman thanked the King of the Caves, and took the silver fish.
It was about the length of your little finger, and had pale moon-stones
for eyes. The fisherman hung the talisman on a chain and wore it round
his neck.
From that morning on, everything prospered with the youth. His boat
never leaked, he was never caught in a storm, and the fish came to his
lines and nets the instant he threw them overboard. Within a year or two
he had grown so rich that he was able to buy the finest merchant ship in
the world, and became a master mariner. Surely no more splendid fellow
than this gallant, young captain was ever found on the Seven Seas. He
sailed to cold and foggy Flannel Land, where the inhabitants all have
incurable head colds, and have no other cloth but red flannel; he traded
in the ports of gorgeous Velvet Land, whose inhabitants dress in velvet,
and cover their walls with velvet hangings and their floors with velvet
rugs.
One pleasant morning, running before a fine westerly breeze, he came to
the Eastern Islands. Down the street of the bazaar walked the Master
Mariner, followed by those who had articles to sell. Some showed him
bright-colored birds which they had caught in the forests; others waved
squares of figured cloth and called upon him to buy them; others still
offered strange flasks and bottles of brass and gleaming copper. At the
end of the street, the Master Mariner discovered a little quiet counter
on which lay some dozens of puffy and distended brown-leather bags.
"What are these?" said the Master Mariner to a tall, lean man with
beady, brown eyes who was in charge of the shop.
"These are breezes, Master Captain," replied the shopman. "If you are
going south, here is a bag of a very reliable northwest wind" (he picked
up one of the brown bags); "if you are going east, here are some of the
best-assorted westerly gusts. I am selling them at a very low price
to-day, in fact at less than they cost me. What will you have?"
"I'll have a smart easterly," replied the Master Mariner.
He put down fifty gold pieces on the counter, took the bag which the
shopman gave him, and walked away.
Now all these leather bags looked very much alike, and instead of
selling the Master Mariner a brisk easterly breeze, the shopman had made
an error, and sold him a frightful storm.
Again the Master Mariner went to sea; but luckily for him, he put the
imprisoned storm away in a locker, intending to use it on some other
voyage. Presently he came to Silk Land, loveliest of all the Cloth
Islands. There the inhabitants dress only in the finest of silks; the
roofs and walls are covered with layers of silk; the sun always shines,
and pretty birds with silken plumage chatter in the fern-like trees.
[Illustration: Man falling into the ocean from a ship with a large white
sail.]
  Splash! And the Master Mariner fell into the sea.
Now the island of Silk Land was at this time ruled by the prettiest of
princesses. She was about eighteen years old; she was tall for her age,
and her eyes were quite the loveliest shade of brown. When the Master
Mariner's fine ship came into the harbor of Silk Land, cleaving the
turquoise water, and with the bright sun shining on her silvery-white
sails, the Princess happened to be resting under a silken awning on the
roof of her palace. Catching sight of the ship, the Princess cried to
her companions:--
"See what a fine ship is coming into port! She must be laden with many
wonderful things. Send word to the Captain that I intend to visit her
to-morrow morning."
The next morning, sure enough, the Princess paid a visit to the ship,
which lay at a wharf below the palace. In honor of the Princess's
coming, everything had been swept, scrubbed, and brightened, and
gorgeous carpets from the Eastern Islands covered the decks. In shaded
nooks, under costly tapestries, lay the treasures of the
cargo--wonderful cloths and spices from the Eastern Islands, vessels of
gold and silver from the Adamant Mountains, and jewels from the Desert
of the Moon.
Now scarcely had the Master Mariner set eyes on the Princess, than he
began to think her quite the most wonderful person he ever had beheld;
as for the Princess, scarcely had the Master Mariner directed two or
three respectful and somewhat tender glances in her direction, than she
began to believe him quite the most gallant youth she had ever seen. She
gave orders that several of the marvels be brought to her palace, and
was looking about for something else, when her eyes chanced to fall upon
the silver fish the Master Mariner was wearing.
"Pray, what is that little silver fish?" asked the Princess.
"A mere trifle which a friend once gave me," replied the Master Mariner,
reading in the Princess's eyes and demeanor that she desired the
talisman. "If Your Majesty will only deign to accept it, it is yours."
And blinded by the Princess's eyes, he gallantly, but somewhat
incautiously, took the silver fish from its chain and gave it to the
Princess, who laughed prettily, and accepted the gift.
Silver trumpets sounded, the servitors gathered up the treasures which
the Princess had chosen, and the royal party returned to the palace with
a good deal of chattering and laughter.
In a few days, the Master Mariner disposed of his cargo, and went again
to sea. But wherever he went, the image of the beautiful Princess of
Silk Land went with him.
Under the silken awning, on the wind-swept balcony, sat the Princess,
and the image of the young Captain was often in her mind.
After three months had passed, the Princess took it into her head that
it was time for the Master Mariner to return to Silk Land, and gave
orders that a sharp watch be kept from the tower of the palace for his
returning vessel. One morning, just as the Princess was having breakfast
in her wonderful silken bed, news was brought to her that a large ship
was headed for the harbor.
"Is it the Master Mariner's ship?" asked the Princess.
"I do not know, Your Majesty," replied the messenger. "The vessel is
still many miles out to sea."
So the Princess jumped out of bed, and without waiting for the ladies of
the bedchamber to dress her, ran upstairs to her balcony. A great ship
was coming in under a favoring breeze. Nearer and nearer it came, till
the Princess could even distinguish the men aboard. Suddenly she uttered
a little scream, and ran down stairs pell-mell. At the same moment the
bells of Silk Land all began to ring wildly, and the beating of drums
sounded through the town.
The approaching ship was a pirate ship! From the topmast flew the
terrible black flag of the pirates of the Northern Isles!
Great confusion followed.
Warned by the uproar of the bells and drums, the people came scurrying
through the streets to the palace; some carrying children in their arms;
others the best beloved of their household furnishings. The palace was
hastily made ready for a siege.
Soon, cursing and swearing, the black-bearded pirates arrived, and began
to sack the town. Into every house they went, pulling out all the bureau
drawers, reading private letters, upsetting the clocks, and leaving the
water running in the kitchen sinks. They filled their pockets with
cuff-links and watches.
Now, if the pirates had taken only the cufflinks, stick-pins, cameo
brooches, silver candlesticks, souvenir spoons, and sugar-tongs, and
then gone away, the raid would not have been too terrible; but the
rogues, bribed by the horrid old King of the Oyster Mountains, a
rejected suitor, were bent on getting possession of the Princess. On
discovering that she had locked herself up in the strong palace, their
rage knew no bounds. They made a dozen different attempts to break open
the palace door, but all in vain. Finally, they decided to besiege the
fortress.
For four days all went well enough with the Princess and her imprisoned
people; but by the sixth day most of the food had been eaten; and by the
end of the eighth day, the Princess knew she would have to surrender the
following morning. With a sinking heart she went to a turret and looked
out over the ocean in the hope of catching sight of a passing sail. But
she saw only the deserted town and the pirate ship riding at anchor in
the bay. An hour later she went to the turret again, and again she saw
no sign of anything at sea. A terrible despair seized upon her, but
nevertheless once more to the turret she climbed.
Far out at sea, headed toward land, was the brave ship of the Master
Mariner!
So great was the joy of the poor Princess at the sight of the gallant
vessel that she almost swooned; but recovering herself, like the
Princess that she was, she ran down into the courtyard and told the news
to her people. Immediately those who were weak or fretful from hunger
began to take heart, and all who could crowded to the barred windows.
The Master Mariner's vessel came riding into the port; the watchers saw
her drop anchor, saw the boats being lowered, and the sailors coming
ashore. Soon the pirates and the sailors were at it hammer and tongs; a
ceaseless clack clack of steel beating upon steel rose to the turrets of
the palace; there were dreadful duels in the alleyways and battles in
the public squares. Alas! just as the sailors were carrying the day, the
Master Mariner received a blow on the head which knocked him insensible,
and the mariners, disorganized by the loss of their chief, were soon
surrounded and taken prisoners. Then, taking heart, the pirates rushed
the palace, and burst open the doors.
When the rogues had taken everything on which they could lay their
hands, they brought the prisoners and the plunder to the marketplace.
"Shall we bind all these people and take them aboard?" asked a pirate.
"No!" roared the one-eyed pirate chief. "Take only the Princess and that
rogue of a Master Mariner."
The people now began to cry, "Oh, don't take the Princess, our dear
Princess!" But all their prayers were useless.
Now, because the Master Mariner's ship was far more swift and beautiful
than the pirate ship, the pirates, after setting fire to their own
vessel, abandoned her, and put their plunder on board the Master
Mariner's vessel. The following morning, leaving the people of Silk Land
robbed and mourning, the pirates sailed away.
Within a few hours, all signs of land had disappeared. The sea was as
black as ink. Against the horizon's edge, the great waves were leaping
and breaking into foam.
"Bring me the list of booty!" cried the pirate captain, roaring the last
word.
So the pirate treasurer came on deck, and read a long list beginning,--
"Fifty-three scarf-pins."
"Hooray!" shouted the pirate crew.
"A hundred and eighty-five sterling silver berry-spoons," next announced
the treasurer.
"Hooray!" cried the crew again.
"One thousand clocks!" cried the treasurer.
"How many with alarms?" asked an old pirate anxiously.
There was a strained silence. The treasurer consulted his list.
"Seven hundred and forty-nine," he answered.
"Hooray!" yelled the pirate crew.
When the list had been read (it took very nearly half an hour to do it)
the one-eyed captain cried, "Bring forth the Master Mariner!"
So the Master Mariner was brought forth, and thrown brutally against a
mast. The pirate chief put his arms akimbo, cleared his throat savagely,
and roared, "So you thought you were going to punish me, did you! Well,
I'll show you what happens to people who upset my plans. Here, Hawk Eye,
and you, Toby, throw this fellow overboard."
Hearing this awful order, the Princess screamed and would have run to
the Master Mariner, had not rude hands restrained her.
Splash! the Mariner fell into the inky sea. Swift as a bird, his own
ship went by him; he saw the mocking face of the pirate chief leering at
him from over the rail; in a few minutes he was alone, all, all alone in
the wide, wide sea. For some time he swam about, and by great good luck
discovered a log of wood strong enough to bear his weight, floating near
at hand. Upon this he climbed, and there we shall leave him for the
present.
When the Captain had disappeared from sight miles behind, the pirate
chief walked over to the Princess, and looking at her, said sneeringly,
"Well, my beauty, are you going to make up your mind to be the wife of
the King of the Oyster Mountains? I'm taking you to him, and mind now,
no fooling!"
The Princess shrank from him with horror, and as she fell back, the sun
gleamed on the silver fish she was wearing at her throat. The chief made
a rude snatch at it; the Princess, however, was quicker than he, and hit
him a good box on the ear.
"Ow!" cried the chief, dancing up and down with rage. "I'll fix you, you
ill-tempered minx. Here, somebody, tie this girl to the mast for the
rest of the day, and give her nothing but bread and water."
In obedience to his order, the Princess, with her arms tied by the
wrists behind her back, was lashed to the mast. When she had been
securely bound, the chief, whose ear was still tingling, took the silver
fish. He was looking at it when he saw something which made him drop the
fish on the deck.
Out of the forecastle door thick clouds of black mist were rolling,
exactly as if the hold of the ship were on fire. For a meddlesome pirate
had found the leather bag of storm-wind and had opened it, mistaking it
for a bag of wine.
The strange clouds, swirling round the deck, grew instant by instant
darker and denser. Soon the tops of the masts could no longer be
distinguished. The sun took on a horrible copper hue, and the sea became
a mottled black and green. A howling wind arose.
A moment later, with the violence of an explosion, the storm burst.
Mountain-high rose the glassy white-capped waves. The lightning fell in
violet cataracts, and thunder roared and tumbled through the caverns of
the sky. An ocean of hissing rain fell into the waters.
Suddenly the pirate chief, as he staggered down the stairs, shouted, "We
are lost!"
Just astern, an enormous, glassy wave, higher than the masts of the
ship, was about to break. The pirates yelled, but little good their
yelling did them. An instant later the wave broke upon the deck, and
crashing tons of green water swept every single pirate into the sea.
Slowly, and with the tense struggle of a wounded animal, the good ship
lifted itself from the waves.
The Princess was the only human being left on board. Only the cords
which bound her to the mast had saved her from being swept away.
Now, when the water swept the deck, the silver fish which lay at the
Princess's feet became alive and darted over the rail into the sea.
The storm continued. The helpless Princess expected every minute to sink
with the ship into the roaring waters. Suddenly, to her horror, a high
rocky island appeared a few miles ahead. Toward this island, over whose
cruel reefs the ocean was foaming and breaking, the ship was drifting
fast. Tied to the mast, the Princess listened to the terrible cry of the
breakers, and, spell-bound, watched the jagged rocks of the island ever
drawing nearer.
Now while the Princess was in this terrible situation, the Master
Mariner, who had been blown before the storm like a feather, also came
in sight of the rocky island. The instant he caught sight of the shore,
and heard the roaring of the breakers, he knew that he could not hope to
reach the land. He was on the edge of the reefs when the King of the
Caves of the Sea, who had been summoned by the silver fish, rose out of
the water beside him, and taking him in his webbed hands, swam with him
to a place of safety. Just as they reached the shallows, the mists of
the tempest parted, and driving through the darkness and the storm,
headed for the reefs, came the Master Mariner's ship with the Princess
tied to the mast.
"Oh, save her! Save the Princess!" cried the Master Mariner.
The King of the Caves of the Sea stretched out his hands over the island
and uttered a strange and mysterious word. So awful was its power that
the rocky cliffs split open, forming a safe and sheltered harbor. Into
this port came the ship, safe at last as a bird in its nest.
So the Master Mariner, the Princess, and the ship were all wonderfully
preserved, and when the storm was over, the King of the Caves saw them
home to Silk Land. There the Master Mariner found his crew waiting for
him, and in a few days they had rigged new sails for the ship which were
even whiter than the old. The inhabitants got back the fifty-three scarf
pins, the hundred and eighty-five sterling silver berry-spoons, the
thousand clocks, and the rest of the booty which the pirates had stowed
away in the Master Mariner's ship.
Great was the rejoicing.
Greater still was the joy, however, when the Master Mariner married the
     THE MARVELOUS DOG AND THE WONDERFUL CAT
[Illustration: Background, books scattered on library shelves.
Foreground, a white dog with glasses and a black cat seated at a low
table, studying books and making notes.]
Once upon a time there was an old enchanter who taught magic and
enchantment to the younger fairies. Year after year, and morning after
morning, he was to be found at his school-room in the Fairies' College,
standing between his desk and a blackboard, now writing down the spell
for turning noses into turnips, now changing sunflower seeds into pearls
before the very eyes of his pupils.
The old enchanter liked this life of quiet and study, and doubtless
would have been teaching in Fairyland to this very day, had he not been
so unfortunate as to quarrel with the terrible sorcerer Zidoc, who was
then Lord High Chancellor of the Fairies' College. I have forgotten
exactly what the quarrel was about, but I think that it had to do with
the best spell for causing castles to fall to pieces in an instant. At
any rate, Zidoc, who considered himself quite the most wonderful
enchanter in Fairyland, was furious at being opposed, and told the old
enchanter, very angrily, that he was not to have his classes any more
and must leave the college at once. So the poor old gentleman packed up
his magic books, put his enchanter's wand into its silver case, and went
to the country one pleasant day in search of a house.
Thanks to the advice of a friendly chimney swift, it did not take him
long to find one. The dwelling was the property of the Fairy Jocapa. It
stood just off the high road, close by a lane of great oaks whose shiny,
fringed leaves glistened in the hot noon-day sun; it had a high roof
with sides steep as mountain slopes, and one great chimney; and its
second story thrust itself out over the first in the old-fashioned way.
Green fields, little hills, and pleasant meadows in which red and white
cows were grazing lay behind the dwelling.
Seeing the front door wide open, the enchanter walked in. It was very
quiet. Only the far away klingle-klangle of a cow-bell could be heard.
"Here shall I live," said the enchanter. And he brought his possessions
to the house.
Now, one autumnal morning, when a blue haze hung over the lonely fields
from which the reapers had departed, and the golden leaves were wet
underfoot, the old enchanter went for a walk down the lane, and finding
the day agreeable, kept on until he found himself in the woods. Arriving
at the crest of a little hill in the woodland, he saw below him, almost
at the foot of the slope, a countryman with a white puppy and a black
kitten following at his heels. The little dog barked merrily out of pure
high spirits, whilst the kitten leaped and struck with its tiny paws at
the passing white butterflies.
As the old enchanter approached the countryman, he happened to hear him
say to the animals,--
"Alas, my poor innocents, what a pity that I should have to abandon
"What's that?" said the enchanter, halting the countryman. "You intend
to abandon these helpless creatures?"
"Alas, I must," replied the countryman, pulling a large blue bandanna
handkerchief from his pocket and applying it to the corners of his eyes.
"We are too poor to be able to feed them, and my children love them so
well that I cannot find it in my heart to do them harm. I am taking them
into these woods to abandon them, in the hope that, like the wild
animals, they will soon learn to shift for themselves."
"Give them to me," said the old enchanter, "I will bring them up." The
countryman nodded his head. "As for you, here is a golden florin. May it
bring you better fortune."
Thus did the white puppy and black kitten change hands.
Once he had led the animals safely home, the enchanter resolved to make
them the most wonderful animals that had ever been seen in the whole
wide world, whether in Fairyland or out of it. Being an enchanter, he
could, of course, do this more easily than other people. So he taught
the cat and the dog all the known languages, then history, arithmetic,
dancing, social deportment, and a variety of the best magic and spells.
The cat, as was to be expected, was particularly good on anything that
had 'cat' in it; he once catalogued all the principal catastrophes;
while the dog, although a good student, had a fancy for writing
doggerel. Many and many a time, when the enchanter and his wonderful
animals were seated in their armchairs round a blazing fire, talking
exactly as any three good friends might talk, a nose would flatten
itself against the panes, and the three companions would see looking in
at them some stranger whose curiosity had got the better of his manners.
The dog, I may say, had grown up to be a fine fellow of the
short-haired, white bull terrier family; the cat had grown to be as
aristocratic as a panther. When their education was complete, the
animals came to their teacher and begged him to let them go away and see
the world. For a long time the enchanter, who loved his charges very
much indeed, resisted their request; but as they continued to press him,
he came at length to yield. Calling them before him, he said to them:--
"Well, dear pupils, if you must go, you must go. I owe the Fairy Jocapa
twelve months rent for this house. She is now living with her nephew,
the King of the Land of the Runaway Rivers. You shall take twelve golden
florins to her. Your route will take you over all the kingdoms of the
whole wide world."
So the white dog, who was the stronger of the two, took the purse with
the twelve golden coins, and put it in a large wallet which he wore at
his side, and then both the wonderful animals said good-bye. At the
corner of the lane they turned again to look for the last time at their
dwelling, and saw their old master still waving at them from the little
window over the door. Then they fared over the hills and far away.
So wise, so well-bred and good-tempered were these wonderful animals,
that their journey across the world was a great success from the
beginning. Their fame spread from kingdom to kingdom like wild-fire. The
universities, colleges, and other learned societies fought with each
other for the privilege of entertaining these distinguished students. To
this very day, the address which the cat made on catapults and
cataplasms, before the professors of the University of Sagessa, is
remembered as one of the great events of the time; while the dog's
address on dogma before the assembled scholars of the Royal Academy of
Fairyland was printed in a special book bound in gold leaf and walpus
leather. Both the cat and the dog were awarded countless honorary
decorations.
And so, little by little, they came to a hilly land in which all the
streams raced pell-mell to the sea, and there they knew themselves to
be in the Kingdom of the Runaway Rivers. A three days' journey brought
them to the royal castle. Arriving in the twilight, they were somewhat
surprised to find a number of torchbearers waiting for them in the
castle courtyard. With great respect, these attendants conducted the cat
and the dog into a little ante-room, and then retired, leaving them
alone. A few minutes later, a very old woman, who, the animals noticed,
was stone-blind, came to take them before the king.
"How strange!" whispered the cat in its rather meouw-y voice.
"Very," whispered back the dog in his deeper tone.
Having opened, one after the other, three great doors with three
different iron keys, the old woman, guiding herself by touching the wall
with her hand, led the animals into a long dark corridor. The cat, who
could see quite well in the dark, did not mind this, but the dog was not
particularly pleased. The echoes of the old woman's boots went rolling
along in the hollow darkness; the dog could hear his heart beat, and saw
his black companion's eyes glowing like pools of flame. Then, to their
mutual relief, the animals saw a point of light appearing far down the
passage, and on reaching this, they discovered a second blind old woman
holding a torch. The first old woman beckoned them to follow this new
guide, and disappeared again into the dark corridors by which they had
arrived.
The second old woman, lifting high the torch, first led her charges
through three more great doors, all of which she carefully locked behind
her. Soon the animals found themselves at the top of a winding stair
whose end was lost in darkness. Down this stair they went, turning, ever
turning, down and round, down and round, till both cat and dog felt
dizzily that they must have reached the heart of the earth. Then, little
by little, a pin-point of light began to glow brighter and brighter,
and the animals found themselves at the foot of the stairs and opposite
a little door. And there, by this door, stood another blind old woman,
who held a torch and beckoned to the animals to follow.
Three more doors they passed, the last one opening on a very narrow,
winding passage. In and out they turned, walking one behind the other,
for a time that seemed very, very long. Suddenly a narrow door appeared
in the winding wall, which opened inward as they drew near, revealing a
beautiful round chamber richly furnished and hung with the finest
tapestries. Beside the fireplace, in which a wood-fire was cheerily
burning, sat a gray-haired lady, who was no other than the Fairy Jocapa,
and in the centre of the room, reading a great book by the light of many
candles, sat a young man, the King.
In spite of the enchanter's careful training in manners, the cat and the
dog, I am sorry to say, almost stared for an instant at the King. Small
wonder that they did so, for the unfortunate young man lay under a
horrid spell, and his face and hands were not pink or white or
sun-brown, like yours or mine, but bright green, like a parrot's wing!
"Welcome, O wonderful animals," said the enchanted King. "Your fame has
gone before you into every land, and it is said that there is no
question you cannot answer. Listen, then, to my story and help me if you
can.
"You see me before you, hideously changed. Until you entered here, an
instant past, no eyes but those of my aunt had beheld my horrible
countenance. It was she who caused this enchanted chamber to appear in
the heart of the foundations of my castle; and in this chamber I have
hidden since that terrible hour when the spell was put upon me. My
subjects only know that I am still alive. The Lord Chancellor rules the
kingdom in my stead. But hearken to my story.
"Ten months ago, as I was driving my chariot down a narrow road built
along a river-bank close to the stream, I encountered a chariot being
driven furiously in the opposite direction. The driver of the chariot
was a tall, elderly man, wearing a wizard's cap; his face was red as
with anger, an evil light gleamed in his small malicious eyes. In order
to let him pass, I turned to one side, as near to the river-brink as I
dared; but the space was too narrow, our chariots locked wheels, and his
was overthrown. Turning upon me a face aflame with hatred, he cried out,
'I will teach you what it is to offend the Enchanter Zidoc'; and an
instant later the wizard himself, the struggling horses, and the
overturned chariot disappeared in a rumble of thunder and a great flash
of flame. I turned homeward, never noticing that anything had happened
to me. As I chanced to pass a roadside cottage, a little child playing
about saw me and ran, screaming for fear, to the door. A little farther
on, I stopped to drink of a spring. Judge of my horror when I leaned
over the clear pool of water and saw that my face had turned a bright
green! I waited till nightfall, stole into the castle unobserved, and
sought the aid of my aunt, the fairy. You know the rest. Speak, O
wonderful dog and wonderful cat, and bid me hope a little!"
And the poor King hid his bright green face in his hands.
"The Enchanter Zidoc is an old enemy of our dear master," said the white
dog, "and his power as a sorcerer is the greatest in Fairyland!'
"I have tried all my powers against him in vain," said the Fairy Jocapa,
sadly.
"But let us not despair," broke in the cat. "Zidoc is now to be found in
these dominions. His castle lies on the border of the Silver Hills. The
dog and I will go there, and see if we can help the King."
So the Fairy and the unhappy King thanked the wise animals, and sent for
the blind old women to lead them back to the upper world. Early next
morning, the famous pair began the journey to the Enchanter's den. The
dog's plan was to pretend to be but an everyday stray dog, and to this
end, he rolled several times in a mud-puddle; the cat, too, was to
appear as a stray cat, and neglected his fine black coat in order to
look the part.
Unfortunately for their plan, Zidoc had in his chamber a little
enchanted bell which rang shrilly when danger threatened him. Hearing
the bell ring late at night, Zidoc rose from his bed, and hurrying to
the turret window, saw, by the light of the waning moon, the dog and the
cat making their way to the castle through the wood. Rubbing his hands
with glee, he determined to let the two animals walk headlong into his
power, and then inflict upon them some terrible revenge.
The first day the dog went indoors, and concealed himself under a sofa,
while the cat remained outside. When twilight came, the dog ran out and
met the cat in the castle garden.
"Did you discover anything?" asked the cat.
"Nothing whatever," replied the dog.
"I will try to-morrow," said the cat.
And so, when the morning came, the dog remained outside while the cat
concealed himself behind a curtain. When the twilight came, the animals
met again.
"Did you discover anything?" asked the dog.
"Very little," replied the cat. "The Sorcerer Serponel is coming
to-morrow to pay Zidoc a visit. One of us must hide in the room in which
they will talk; for perhaps we may learn something which may help us to
lift the spell from the King."
"To-morrow it is my turn," said the dog. And so the next morning he
stole into the house and hid again beneath the sofa.
Now Zidoc knew very well where the dog had concealed himself. Moreover,
he had summoned the powerful Serponel to his aid in order that the dog
and the cat should have no opportunity to escape.
When Serponel arrived, both the wicked enchanters went to the room in
which the dog lay concealed. First, Zidoc locked the only door with a
great key and then he said to Serponel,--
"Brother, someone tells me that there is an enemy hidden under the
sofa."
"Yes, brother," replied the dreadful Serponel.
"And something tells me that it is time to let him feel your staff."
Now Zidoc had an enchanted staff whose blows were mortal, and knowing
this, the poor dog, who was trapped between the wall and the two
sorcerers, grew cold with fear to the tip of his white tail. Just as he
was about to make a bolt into the open, Zidoc dragged the sofa swiftly
aside, and aimed a terrible blow at him, which by the greatest good luck
just missed its mark. He then ran out into the room, pursued by the
sorcerers, who little by little forced him toward a corner.
And now, just as Zidoc, holding the staff uplifted, was about to strike
the poor dog with all his force, a black shape, with flaming eyes and
paws outstretched to scratch, leaped through the open window and landed
upon Zidoc's back. It was the brave cat, who had heard the fracas from
his hiding-place below and had clawed his way up the castle wall to help
his friend. Valiant Puss, forgetting in one instant, I must admit, all
its knowledge of languages, catastrophes, history, social deportment,
and agriculture, plunged instantly into the fray, and gave Zidoc a
frightful scratch, which so upset him that it caused him to drop his
staff, while the dog profiting by the confusion, and forgetting all
about geometry, mathematics, agriculture, and dogma, managed to give
Serponel a good bite just above the ankle.
The wily Zidoc, however, was not to be so easily thwarted. Uttering a
magic word, he caused the room to be filled with darkness, and in the
cover of this darkness he transformed himself instantly into a black cat
exactly like the learned cat, while Serponel changed himself into a
white dog exactly like the learned dog. At the same moment he caused the
locked door to fly open.
"Now," thought he, "I will cause the cat to follow the wrong white dog,
and the dog to follow the wrong cat; we shall thus separate the animals,
and when we have lured them far away from each other, Serponel and I
will resume our true forms, and destroy these meddlesome creatures."
When the darkness cleared, the hearts of the true animals fell for fear
lest the sorcerer's ruse be successful; but they met the challenge
readily, and instead of fleeing, stood their ground; the true dog
battling with the false dog, the real cat with the false cat. Never was
such a hullaballoo heard in Fairyland. Then, seeing that he was in
danger of being badly scratched, Zidoe brought on another darkness, the
floor of the castle shook, a noise as of thunder roared and rattled
through the room. When the darkness ended, both the enchanters had been
separated and the cats were confused, the real dog was chasing the real
cat, thinking that he was following Zidoc, while Serponel, who had been
the false white dog, was pursuing Zidoc, who had been the false black
cat! Down the stairs, over the terraces and the gardens ran the true
dog, pursuing the true cat, while indoors, up and down through the rooms
and over the furniture, raced the false animals.
The poor cat, thinking he was being pursued by the wrong dog, grew short
of breath, and, hearing the snapping at his heels, ran up a convenient
tree. Hardly had he reached a point above the dog's jaws when a voice
said:--
"Why, my pupils, my pupils! What a way to behave! Stop your quarreling
this instant!"
The animals turned to look, and saw their master, the old enchanter. He
had been worried by their long absence and had gone forth to look for
them. Thus, at the same moment that the poor dog saw that he had been
pursuing his friend, the cat saw that he had been escaping from his
comrade.
Suddenly a noise from the castle arrested their attention, and on
looking up, all saw through the windows the false dog pursuing the false
cat down the hall of state.
Now, if you remember the first part of this story, you will recall that
Zidoc quarreled with the old enchanter over the right spell for
destroying castles. A triumphant smile shone on the lips of the old
teacher; he stretched forth his hand toward the castle and uttered a
magic word.
There was a roar as of twenty thousand cataracts, and in the twinkling
of an eye, the castle collapsed in a cloud of dust, burying the two
wicked magicians in its ruins.
"There, I told him so!" said the old enchanter.
When the dog and the cat had recovered from the events of the day, the
three friends began their journey back to the palace of the enchanted
King. He came to the castle gate to meet them, for Zidoc's overthrow had
broken the spell which had so oddly disfigured him. Through the open
doors, a splendid banquet could be seen waiting, and the sound of music
was heard.
So the old enchanter gave his arm to the Fairy Jocapa, the Prince gave
his to the white dog, and the cat followed all by himself. Then came the
host of rejoicing courtiers.
When the festival was over, the enchanter and the wonderful animals went
back, loaded with royal gifts, to their own little house and lived
happily there to a good old age.
     THE SHEPHERD OF CLOUDS
[Illustration: A man and two elves watching clouds pour through a large
gate.]
Once upon a time a young husband and wife named Giles and Phyllida lived
in a cottage in the heart of a great plain. League upon league, the rich
land fell away to the west, there to end at a wall of high mountains
into whose fastnesses no one had ever ventured. Yet the mountains were
very beautiful. In the cold of a clear winter's day, the snowy summits
and rust-colored pinnacles shone bright and near at hand; in the spring,
fogs hid them, and lay like gray mantles upon the lower slopes. Midway
in the mountain wall, a wide chasm marked the entrance to a deep, gloomy
valley, out of which a roaring mountain torrent hurried, to lose itself
in the plain below. And because somewhere in the heart of this dark
valley storms were brewed, whose dark clouds, laden with lightning and
hail, poured from between the crags of the valley out over the land,
this valley was known as the Valley of Thunder. According to an old
legend, out of this valley a king should one day come to rule over the
people of the plain.
Giles and Phyllida kept house by themselves. They had two cows, one red
and white, the other black and white, a flock of hens, some hives of
bees, a white horse, a dog, and a cat.  All day long Phyllida worked
happily at the household tasks, baking the sweet white bread and marking
the fresh golden butter into square pats, while Giles went out to work
in the waving grain; and Phyllida, watching from a window, would see the
sun flash on the uplifted blade of her husband's scythe.
One day Phyllida said to Giles:--
"I have made a dress for the youngest child of our cousins, Jack and
Jill, and this morning I shall saddle the white horse and ride over to
their cottage. Perhaps I may stay with them for a few days. You will
find a fresh baking of bread and a meat-pie in the larder. Good-bye,
Giles; I'll soon be home again."
So Giles answered, "Good-bye," and away rode Phyllida on the white
horse.
A few days passed, and Giles, wandering here and there through the quiet
house, felt very lonely indeed. Finally he could stand it no longer, and
said to himself, "Phyllida must be on her way home now; I shall walk
down the highway and meet her."
So he turned all the animals loose in the fields, and putting a few
slices of bread and cheese in his pockets, set forth upon the road.
Leagues ahead of him stood the mysterious mountains rising palely
through the haze of the midsummer afternoon. A pale violet light fell on
their distant precipices, and the snow in the rifts upon their sides
appeared of the purest and loveliest white. Gusts of wind hurrying from
the distant summits swept the great plain, and the fields of ripening
wheat bent before them and rustled harshly.
Suddenly, down the throat of the Thunder Valley, Giles saw a river of
lightning fall, and from far away came a low murmur of thunder. Then,
faster and faster, a storm poured down the chasm like a flood, drowning
out the light of the sun, stilling the songs of the little birds, and
turning to the sky the pale underside of the leaves of the roadside
trees. A darkness as of night itself covered the land. Rain began to
fall in great spattering drops.  Now, by the glare of the lightning,
Giles would see the endless fields, drenched and waving in the rain; now
the Thunder Valley itself, covered with a floor of onrushing cloud
unfolding, turning, and sinking in continuous and multitudinous
activity.
Night came on amid the storm, and a flash of lightning revealed to Giles
that he had lost his way. Hoping to find a shelter or some friendly
cottage, however, he plunged on; but the road became worse and worse,
and he was again and again forced to wade brooks flooded by the tempest.
At length his steps led him into a pine wood, and there in the thickest
part he found a little shelter, and fell asleep.
When he woke, numb, cramped, and cold, he found to his horror that in
the night and darkness he had blundered on into the Valley of Thunder,
into which no living soul had ever before advanced. Worst of all, he
could not find the way by which he had entered, for high crags rose on
every side and held him prisoner. Presently, to his amazement, he beheld
a narrow flight of steps cut in the solid rock of the mountainside. Up
these steps climbed Giles, and as he mounted higher, the stairs began to
twist and turn amid the crags and pinnacles. At the end of an hour's
ascent, he found himself at a turn from which the Thunder Valley, the
chasm through which it opened into the plain, and the wide plain itself,
could all be seen.
Giles lingered there a while, trying to see his own cottage, or perhaps
Phyllida on her white horse; but he could see neither one nor the other.
So he began to climb again. All day long he climbed and climbed and
climbed. Twilight fell. The circle of the sun dropped below the level
horizon of the distant fields. One still golden star hung on the fringe
of the sun-glow. The stairs began to widen, and presently Giles found
himself at the summit of the mountain. Before his eyes lay a little
level field surrounded by strange crags and pinnacles, looming tall and
black against the fast-appearing stars, and as Giles rubbed his eyes in
wonder, lights shone here and there in the sides of the towering rocks,
even as lights shine in the windows of a village when you see it from
afar.
Giles rubbed his eyes again. Lights? What could they mean? Presently a
great door, cut in the side of a towering mass of stone, opened with a
burst of light, and toward Giles there hurried the two strangest
creatures whom he had ever seen. These were two elves, alike as two peas
and each about three feet tall. Instead of having ears much like other
elves, however, the first one had ears like great curved cornucopias,
which projected almost a foot on each side of his enormous round head,
while the other, whose ears were quite natural, had but one huge eye in
the centre of his forehead.
Without saying a single word, these strange elves seized Giles by the
hands, and after hurrying him across the open space, urged him through
the open doors into the house in the crags.
Still keeping silence, the elves led Giles through hundreds of splendid
rooms and great halls, all lighted by hanging lamps as countless in
number as the leaves upon the trees. Suddenly, a great archway rose
before them, through which appeared a hall larger and brighter than all
the others seen before. At one end of it, under a canopy of rosy-gray,
stood a golden throne, and on the throne sat a being dressed in radiant
blue--in blue such as the sky wears after a rain, when the dark clouds
with bright edges break asunder and reveal the glory overhead. At the
same moment, the countless mountain elves gathered in the hall began to
sing:--
  "All Hail, All Hail to the Shepherd of Clouds,
    Who, high in his mountain-top, rules o'er the' weather;
  He sends the rich rain over mountain and plain,
   And sprinkles the dew-drops afar o'er the heather."
The elves led Giles before the Shepherd.
"How comest thou, mortal, to invade my mountain?" said the Shepherd.
"I went forth to seek Phyllida," said Giles, "and lost my way in the
storm."
"What sayest thou, Eye-o?" said the Shepherd to the elf with the single
great eye in his forehead.
"The mortal speaks the truth," answered Eye-o in the queerest,
squealiest voice. "I saw him set out yesterday from his cottage on the
plain. He had not gone far when the storm which Your Mightiness prepared
in the morning and sent forth in the afternoon overtook him. He lost his
way, and chance led him to your dwelling, O Shepherd of Clouds."
"What sayest thou, Ear-o?" said the Shepherd to the elf with the great
ears.
"I heard him say good-bye to his wife Wednesday last," replied the elf
in a voice exactly like that of his brother. "Phyllida said to him, 'You
will find a fresh baking of bread and a meat-pie in the larder.'"
The Shepherd of Clouds fixed his deep, solemn gaze upon Giles and said:--
"Mortal, I have hearkened to your story and to the words of my faithful
Eye-o, who sees all things that happen in the whole wide world; I have
paid heed to the words of Ear-o, who hears all things that are to be
heard under the sun. Chance has led you to discover the secret of the
weather. Nevermore must you revisit the lower world. Here shall you stay
till Death overtakes you. Obey me, and I will give you happiness and
honor; seek to escape, and my lightnings will find you wheresoever you
may hide."
"Oh, no! no! no!" cried poor Giles, throwing himself down before the
throne. "Great Shepherd of Clouds, do not keep me here. Let me return to
my cottage on the plain, to Phyllida who waits for me, and knows not
whither I am gone or whether I am living or dead. Oh, let me go, let me
go!"
But the Shepherd only shook his head austerely, and rising from his
throne, disappeared behind the rose-gray curtains. Again the mountain
elves sang, and as they sang, the great hall slowly grew darker than the
darkest night, and cold gusts of wind arose wailing in the darkness.
Presently Giles felt his body grow weak, strong hands seized him and
bore him up, and an instant later a deep sleep blotted out the world.
When he awoke, he found himself in a little room. Dawn was at hand, and
the sweet, cold mountain air was blowing through the eastern window.
Suddenly, the door swung open, and Eye-o and Ear-o entered.
"The sun is rising, Giles," said Ear-o, "and your appointed task awaits
you. The Shepherd wishes the clouds released at once. Hurry, hurry,
hurry, Giles, and open their prison-door."
So Giles went forth with the elves. Over the summit of the mountain they
ran, along a path which wandered here and there--now dodging between
huge boulders, now skirting terrible precipices. Presently Giles saw a
monstrous wall of rock rising before him, in which were fixed two brazen
doors taller and more stately than he had ever seen in the world below.
Beside these doors, a flight of steps began, which led to the top of the
wall.
Curious to see what lay behind the wall and the closed doors, Giles
hurried to the top. He found himself standing at the brink of a great
bowl, many miles wide and many miles long, hollowed out of the very rock
of the mountaintop. Within this bowl, like a giant flock of sheep, lay
hundreds of clouds on whose misty tops the rising sun poured gold, pale
lavender, and rose. At first, Giles thought them motionless, but as he
gazed intently within the bowl, he saw that the clouds moved and swayed
much like anchored ships in a tide.
This bowl was the weather-bowl. In it the Shepherd of Clouds prepared
the weather for the neighboring countries. One day he would keep the
fair-weather clouds at home and let the rain-clouds sail over the land;
on another day, he would keep all the clouds in and let the sun shine;
on other days he would mix together such frosts, mists, and
snow-flurries as the season required.
Suddenly, ringing infinitely sweet over the mountain-top, rose the clear
music of a silver horn.
"It is the Shepherd!" cried Eye-o and Ear-o.
"The hour is at hand to send the clouds over the earth. Quick, Giles,
unbar the doors!"
So Giles unbound the giant doors, which of their own volition opened
wide. A sound as of thunder heard from far away over the sea beat upon
Giles's ear as the portals turned upon their hinges. In answer to this
sound, the clouds rose and lifted their golden heads, and hastening to
the brazen doors, one by one escaped through them to the sunlit spaces
of the morning sky. There, they formed themselves into a fleet, and
sailed majestically away.
Thus Giles became the servant of the Shepherd of Clouds. It was his task
to unbar the door when the Shepherd had prepared the weather; it was his
to lock the clouds in, once they had returned from the heavens in answer
to the Shepherd's summoning horn. In time he came to know the
rain-clouds from their fair-weather brothers; he learned how frosts were
sent forth; how fogs were made; and he was even allowed to prepare a
small storm. He saw the icy caverns in which the hail-stones lie piled
in monstrous bags, the lightning-bolts in their crystal jars, and even
the prisoned storm-winds. You may be sure that, when he could so arrange
it, Phyllida's garden had quite the finest variety of weather. For Eye-o
and Ear-o would tell him about her.
"Tell me, what is Phyllida doing?" Giles would say again and again.
And Eye-o would answer, "She is out in the garden gathering plums"; or,
"she is in the kitchen making gingerbread."
And then Giles would say to Ear-o, "Tell me, what is Phyllida saying?"
And Ear-o would answer, "'Oh, would that my lad were home!'"
Two years passed, and Giles, who had found no opportunity of escape,
began to lose hope of doing so. Never again, he feared, would he see
Phyllida. One day, with Eye-o and Ear-o by his side, he sat on a great
boulder and gazed gloomily down on the plain. Spring was just ripening
into early summer, the plain was at its very greenest and loveliest, and
here and there a little blue wood-smoke hung over the tiny villages.
Giles thought of Phyllida far, far away, and a terrible loneliness
poured into his heart. Eye-o and Ear-o sitting beside him, their long,
strange arms clasped about their knees, looked on with sympathy.
Presently Ear-o's right ear turned itself about, and after a moment's
silence, the elf said:--
"I hear voices telling of war. I hear the Robber King of the Black Lakes
summoning his terrible army. He is preparing a secret attack on the
people of the plain."
"I see him! I see him!" cried Eye-o. "He is talking to the Grand
Chamberlain Scelerato."
"Listen," said Ear-o; "he is saying, 'We will sweep the land at dawn,
steal the grain, and destroy every village to its foundation.'"
"I see the robbers gathering," said Eye-o. "They are hiding in the dark
pine forests, lest they be seen by the people of the plain. The sunlight
pierces here and there through the thick branches and shines on the
breastplates of the armed men."
At this terrible news, Giles was stricken to the heart with anxiety and
fear. What was to become of Phyllida and the people of the plain? If he
could only hurry down the mountain and warn them! If he could only
escape! And he looked round eagerly, as he had looked a thousand times
before, for any avenue of escape; but his gaze met only the great
precipices of the mountain and the guarded stairs.
What could he do? His heart became like ice, and he feared to gaze upon
the plain lest he see the smoke of burning villages. All night long he
never closed his eyes. At dawn he rose and hurried to the top of the
gate which overlooked the cloud-bowl. For two whole weeks, not a cloud
had been allowed to roam the sky, and it seemed to Giles that the mists
were angry, and that a darkness brooded upon them. Turning toward the
plain, Giles saw, at the edge of the land, a little glow of fire. The
robbers had invaded the plain!
Presently Eye-o came clambering up the steps.
"I see a village in flames," said the elf. "The inhabitants are fleeing
down the roads. The news is spreading, and the people of the plain are
hurrying to seek refuge in the mountains."
"Oh, where is Phyllida?" cried Giles.
"She is on the highway with Jack and Jill and their children, hastening
toward the Valley of Thunder," answered the elf.
Suddenly Giles stood up, and throwing his arms high over his head,
uttered a loud shout. "I can save them," he cried. "Let us send a storm
against the robbers. Hurry, let us prepare the worst tempest that ever
was seen."
And away he ran to the hail-stone caverns, and carrying bag after bag to
the brim, emptied them all into the weather-bowl; he then tossed in a
dozen skinsful of the fiercest storm-winds, and ended by casting in all
the jars of thunderbolts that were to be found in the cavern. You should
have heard the crash of the crystal vases on the rocky floor of the
weather-bowl, and the hiss with which the lightning escaped and hid in
the rolling edges of the clouds. The great bowl roared and trembled, the
clouds massed together and grew dark; lightning played over the black
crests of the thunder-heads. From the top of the gate, Giles took one
satisfied look into the prisoned tempest, and then hurried down to unbar
Through the gates, like wild herds, poured the clouds, and rising in the
air, were caught by the spreading storm-winds and whirled madly over the
sky. The thunder roared as no mortal had ever before heard it or ever
will hear it again, and the tempest sailed away to break in all its
anger over the heads of the robber army. So terrible was the noise that
the enchanted mountain trembled to its very foundations.
Hearing the roar, the Shepherd of Clouds himself was roused and ran down
to the cloudbowl; but so dark was the mountain-top that he lost his way,
and narrowly missed falling down a precipice. The mountain elves,
terrified by the confusion, ran hither and thither like ants whose nests
had been opened. Crash went the thunder! Rumble, rumble, rumble, room,
rrrr-rang bang! bang!
Once he had seen the storm break over the robber army, Giles, taking
advantage of the darkness, noise, and confusion, determined to make one
more effort to escape. Down the endless stairs he hurried, splashing
through the falling rain, down, and down, and down. Once at the bottom,
he was lucky enough to find the path out of the chasm, and hurried along
it to the mouth of the Valley of Thunder.
He was free! The terrible storm had spent itself, and the sun was
beginning to shine on the thousand rain-drops caught in the matted
grass. A rainbow formed just as Giles approached the plain, and the
little birds came out to shake the rain from their feathers.
Now, in the secure shelter of an overhanging cliff, were to be found
those people of the plain who had fled to the valley for refuge; and
when these poor worried folk saw Giles coming down the valley, they
recalled the prophecy that a king should come to them out of the valley,
and hailed Giles as their king. Best of all, Phyllida herself ran out,
and threw her arms about her husband. As for the robbers, the storm had
overwhelmed them and swept them all into the river. There, I am glad to
say, they turned into little fishes.
When the Shepherd of Clouds found that Giles had escaped after making
all this disturbance, he was very angry, and rushed to his lightning
closet to hurl some thunderbolts at him. When he got to the closet,
however, he found that Giles had used every single bolt, and that the
cupboard was empty. Consequently, he had to wait till the end of summer
before he could get some new lightning, and by that time, he was so busy
arranging the autumn frosts that he quite forgot about Giles.
So Giles and Phyllida became King and Queen of the people of the plain
and lived happily ever after.
     THE CITY UNDER THE SEA
[Illustration: A black ship in the background, persuded by another ship
in the foreground.]
Once upon a time, in a country of mountains which bordered upon the sea,
dwelt a rich merchant who had three sons. The eldest and the second-born
were his joy, for they were merchants too, and remained at his side; but
the youngest often caused him much anxiety. Not that this youngest son
was a wild or a bad lad; but love of the sea and desire for adventure
ran like fire in his veins, and he could not bring himself to sit beside
his father and his brothers in the counting-house.
Weary at length of the constant reproaches of his kinsmen, he turned
away one night from his father's house and joined a ship as a common
sailor. Clad in sailor blue, wearing a little cap, a blouse open at the
throat, and trousers cut wide at the bottoms, the runaway lad sailed
over the sea to foreign lands and isles. And as the years passed, one by
one, and brought no tidings of him, his father and his brothers gave him
up for lost.
Now the King of the country in which the rich merchant and his son dwelt
loved rare gems and precious stones more than anything else in the
world. Hidden secretly away in the deep foundations of his castle lay
his treasure-room: it was circular in shape and built of black marble,
and at equal distance one from the other, along the curving wall, stood
a hundred statues of armed men, holding ever-burning lights. A hundred
coffers of green stone lay on the floor, one at the base of each statue,
each coffer piled high with gems.
Night after night, when all was still, the King would descend to the
secret chamber, and throwing open the covers of the jewel-chests, would
gaze long and silently into the gleaming mass within.
One night the King led his neighbor, the Emperor of the Seven Isles, to
the jewel-room, and showed him his treasures.
"Are there fairer jewels to be found in the whole wide world?" said the
King proudly.
"They are indeed noble," replied the Emperor, nodding his gray head.
"But how happens it that the Emerald of the Sea is not among them? The
Emerald of the Sea is the most glorious jewel in the whole wide world.
Years ago a fisherman of the Land of the Dawn found it in a strangely
carved box which a storm had washed into his nets. I saw it when I was
but a young prince; it hung by a chain from the throat of the Princess
of the Dawn, and shone there as if the very secret of the sea were
hidden in its heart."
"Where is this emerald to be found?" asked the King, who was consumed
with the desire to add the jewel to his possessions. "Tell me, that I
may at once send an expedition in search of it."
"I have not heard of it for many a long year," replied the Emperor, "but
I think it is still in the Land of the Dawn."
So great was the King's impatience to become the owner of the Emerald of
the Sea, that he could scarcely wait for the morning. All night long he
slept not a wink for thinking of it, and hardly had the red shield of
the morning sun risen above the thin mists lying at the edge of the sea
and sky, when he sent for the rich merchant to come to the palace at
once.
Wondering much at the summons, the merchant made haste to the palace,
and was there taken instantly before the King. When the King saw him, he
"You are the greatest and richest merchant in my dominions. Know, then,
that I have a task worthy of you. In the Land of the Dawn there is a
jewel called the Emerald of the Sea; it is your task to discover it and
purchase it for me. To possess it, I would give all the gold in my
realm. Take heed that you return with it, for if you fail me, my anger
shall strike you down."
At these words the merchant bowed low, and replied that he would that
very day sail for the Land of the Dawn in his fastest ship. Then,
returning home, he gave orders that the best vessel in all his fleets be
immediately prepared for the journey; and so swiftly was this done, that
the merchant sailed for the Land of the Dawn on the morning tide.
Many days and many leagues he sailed, over shining seas, till he reached
the harbor of the Land of the Dawn. Ships were entering and ships were
leaving the lovely mountain-circled bay. How the broad sails tugged at
their ropes as a steady wind filled their curving white depths! How
silver-clear shone the furrows of foam flowing back from the
onward-hurrying bows!
Making her way out toward the great, still mirror of the summer sea, was
a strange black vessel, with sails as red as fire.
The merchant anchored his ship in a quiet bay, and hastened ashore to
find the Lord Treasurer of the Kingdom. He found this nobleman at ease
on a balcony of his castle which overlooked the sea. Upon hearing the
merchant's story, the nobleman started with surprise, and said:--
"You are just too late! At the command of my royal master, the Prince of
the Land of the Dawn, I sold the Emerald of the Sea only an hour ago to
the master of a strange vessel. See, there she is now." And the Lord
Treasurer pointed out over the sea to the black ship with the red sails,
which was just then disappearing over the horizon.
Thankful that the other ship was still in sight, the merchant hurried
back to his own vessel and gave chase. Luckily for him, there was a full
moon that night, by which the shadowy hulk and the swaying masts of the
mysterious ship could be seen.
All the next day they sailed, but never an inch nearer to the other
vessel did they come, though the merchant loaded his ship with all the
canvas she could bear. Another night and another day found them no
nearer. Finally, late in the afternoon of the third day, a great storm
came sailing over the edge of the sea; a blast of wind struck the
merchant's ship, then a torrent of rain, and night came on just as the
storm was at its height.
When the daylight came again, the other ship had completely disappeared;
and though the worried merchant sailed here and sailed there, never a
sign of the stranger could he find. At last, with a heavy heart, he gave
up the quest and returned to his King with the evil tidings.
The King, I hardly need say, was beside himself with rage and
disappointment. Scowling so terribly that his eyebrows almost met, he
cried to the merchant:--
"Wretch, through you I have lost the finest jewel in the world! If you
do not find it within a year, your life and your possessions shall be
forfeited to me."
On hearing these terrible words, the merchant turned pale, for he had no
more idea where the Emerald of the Sea was to be found than had a
new-born child. His two sons, however, when they had heard his story,
bade him not to despair, and declared that they would that very night go
forth and seek the emerald through the world.
Now, because the poor merchant could not bear to be left quite alone, it
was finally agreed that only the eldest son should go in search of the
jewel, while the second-born should remain at home. This, of course, was
much against the will of the second son; nevertheless, so it was
arranged.
And so the eldest son sailed away. The days lengthened into weeks, the
weeks into months, the months into a year, yet the eldest son did not
return. A guard of soldiers led the unhappy merchant before the King.
"Well, have you found the Emerald of the Sea?" said the King.
"No," replied the merchant, hopelessly. And now all would certainly have
been over with the poor merchant, had not his second son begged and
pleaded with the King for a year of respite in which he, too, might
search for the emerald through the world. Though at first unwilling, the
King at length yielded to the plea, but exacted one half of the
merchant's possessions as a forfeit.
And so the second son sailed away. Days lengthened into weeks, weeks
lengthened into months, the months into a year, yet the second son did
not return. Cruel storms wrecked so many of the merchant's ships that he
lost the other half of his possessions, and was forced to take refuge in
a miserable cottage by the marshes beyond the town.
On the last night of the year granted to him by the King, the unhappy
man sat in his poor house by a crumbling driftwood fire, listening to
the surf breaking on the beach that edged the marsh. Far away, he heard
the bells of the royal city sound the midnight hour. Neither the eldest
son nor the second-born had returned. The second year of respite was at
an end; nothing now could stay the anger of the King.
Suddenly there came a vigorous rat-tat-tat on the door.
"I am lost," murmured the poor merchant to himself. "The King's soldiers
are already at the door." And advancing unsteadily across the room, he
threw the door open wide.
A gust of wind from the sea blew in, which bent back the flame of the
taper in his hand, and then across the threshold stepped the youngest
son. He was still a sailor and clad in sailor blue, and there was a
cutlass in his belt. So shaken with joy was the merchant that for some
time he could not utter a word, but merely clung to the strong shoulders
of the young seaman.
As for the sailor son, he managed to let his father know that he had
returned from distant lands only that very evening, and had just heard
of the disasters which had overtaken his family.
As they talked, steps were heard outside; and then, without waiting to
knock, a sergeant of the King's guard forced open the door, and,
followed by a handful of soldiers, entered the wretched room and took
the merchant and his son prisoners. They spent the night on the straw in
the royal dungeons, and in the morning were led before the King.
On seeing the merchant, the irate King scowled more angrily than
ever,--for the loss of the Emerald of the Sea had never ceased from
troubling him,--and said:--
"Well, have you found the Emerald of the Sea?"
"No," said the poor merchant.
"Summon the executioner!" cried the King.
And now the poor man would certainly have bade farewell to earth, had
not the youngest son, like his brothers, interceded with the King.
At first the King would hear not a word of it, and called to his guard
to take the prisoners instantly away; but it being whispered that the
sailor, although not much more than a lad, had once fought bravely and
been sorely wounded in the royal service, he at length gave ear to the
youngest son's prayer and said:--
"Yes, you shall have another year. But know that this year shall be the
last. If you do not return with the Emerald of the Sea within a
twelvemonth, nothing shall save you. I have spoken."
And thus the sailor son went in search of the Emerald. What happened to
him upon his search, in what situation he discovered his brothers, and
how he visited the City under the Sea, you shall shortly hear.
Now the youngest son had a little boat of his own. It was so small that,
when the wind no longer filled its sails, it could be rowed along, and
in this boat the sailor lad began his voyage. From harbor to harbor,
from nation to nation, he sailed, but never a soul he found who could
tell him aught of the strange black ship with the fiery sails or the
lost Emerald of the Sea. Even the people of the Land of the Dawn could
tell him only that the gem had been sold to an unknown prince.
Presently the winter of the year overtook him, and in one of the sudden
storms that heralded the coming of the cold, his little boat went ashore
on a rocky coast, and was soon pounded to pieces by the breakers. Thrown
into the sea during the wreck, the sailor was himself so tossed and
trampled by the waves that he reached the shore far more dead than
alive. Indeed, had it not been for a poor fisherman and his wife, there
would have been no more story to tell. These good people, I am glad to
say, rescued the sailor from the fury of the waters and nursed him back
to health and strength again.
When his strength was quite restored, the sailor told this good couple
the story of how he had gone forth to seek through the wide world the
Emerald of the Sea.
"But my poor lad," said the kind fisherman, "the Emerald of the Sea has
vanished forever from mortal eyes."
"What! You know of the emerald?" cried the sailor.
"Alas, yes," replied the fisherman. "Two years ago the Prince of the
Unknown Isles sent the finest vessel in his fleet to the Land of the
Dawn to buy the jewel. A beautiful ship was she, with a hull as black as
night and sails as red as fire. My brother and I sailed in her crew. The
jewel was taken aboard. Our brave ship set sail for the Unknown Isles.
Hardly were we three days out of the sight of land, when a storm
overtook us and sank the vessel. I chanced to be tossed in the water
near a great fragment of the mast, and clung to this until a passing
vessel found me. Of all aboard, I alone survived. Forty fathoms deep
lies the Emerald of the Sea, never more to be seen but by the dumb
creatures of the waters."
At these tidings the brave sailor's heart became like ice; nevertheless,
he cried:--
"Alas, good friend, I know that what you say is true, yet shall I not
despair; for, come what will, I must save my father!"
Hearing this, the fisherman's wife, a quiet, good body who had had
little to say, whispered that it would be well first to consult the
Witch of the Sands.
"The Witch of the Sands? Who is she and where can I find her?" cried the
sailor.
"The Witch of the Sands dwells a hundred leagues from here," replied the
fisherman's wife. "All the mysteries of the waters are in her keeping
and she has an answer for them all. You must go to her and ask her to
help you."
So the sailor thanked the good fisherman and his wife, and set out to
walk the hundred leagues to the house of the Witch of the Sands. His
path lay along a desolate and lonely shore, on whose rocky beaches the
wooden bones of old wrecks lay rotting, half buried in stones and weed.
Just as the third day's sun was sinking in the shining waters, the
sailor arrived at the Witch's dwelling.
The Witch made her home in a deserted old ship, which a storm of long
ago had cast far up the sands. As for the Witch herself, she was a woman
so old that the sailor thought she surely must have been living when the
moon and the stars were made. A fringe of sea-shells circled the crown
of her high hat, and round her wrists were bracelets of pearly
periwinkles.
Just as the sailor approached the Witch's door, a young fur seal, who
had been basking in a little pool left along the beach by the tide,
hastened out of his puddle, and running swiftly toward him on his
flappers, nuzzled his hand with his sleek, wet head, just like a young
dog.
"Down, Neptune, down!" cried the witch shrilly.
"Good evening, madam," said the sailor in his politest manner.
"You are the third person who has come here to ask me the question you
are going to ask," screamed the Witch of the Sands, whose magic powers
had revealed to her the reason of the sailor's coming. "I know you! You
are the youngest son. Your two brothers have been here to ask me the way
under the sea, and I told them; but bless me, they have n't come back
yet. Just like young men to forget an old woman's warning. I've a good
mind not to tell you the way to the under-waters; indeed, I would n't if
you were n't a sailor and a child of the sea. Yes, I can show you the
road to under the sea; but you must not ask me about the emerald,
because I don't know where it is myself. It was in the Land of the Dawn,
and that's the last I heard of it! When you do get to the under-waters,
don't forget that. You'll have to hurry back like the wind, for the year
which the King gave your father is almost gone. Don't ask me questions!
I know you are going to ask one, because I'm not a man; and I know what
you are going to ask, because I'm a witch."
And the strange old lady laughed and, putting her hands on her waist,
swayed so violently from side to side that the sea-shells on her hat
rattled and clicked. Then, after a pause to gather breath, she
continued: "Before you can go down into the waters, I shall have to give
you an enchanted ring. Mind you bring it back, for there are only three
of them in the whole wide world, and your brothers have the other two.
Goodness me, but I don't know why I let them take my magic rings. Now
that I come to think of it, I don't know as I shall let you take my
ring. However, it has been on my mind for some time to tell the King of
the City under the Sea that he's been telling the tide to come
altogether too near my ship. You can take the ring if you will promise
to deliver my message. Promise!"
There was a pause, and the sailor, who had listened to the Witch's every
word, solemnly promised to carry her message to the King under the Sea.
He was just about to ask a question or two, when the Witch of the Sands,
drawing another long, long breath, cried out again:--
"Don't ask questions! I've told you once and I've told you twice, and
I'll tell you as many times as there are drops of water in the sea! The
path to the City under the Sea begins a hundred leagues to the north; in
the high cliffs there, when the tide is low, you'll find the mouth of a
great cave; walk down this cave, and down and down and down, till you
feel water rising round your feet. Then put on my ring and walk boldly
ahead. In a little while you will see the city shining in the waters.
Once there, seek out the King and tell him of your quest. But on no
account" (and here the Witch solemnly turned round three times) "eat or
drink anything offered to you while you are in the under-waters. If you
do, you will forget everything of your past life, your father, your
quest, and the Emerald of the Sea. Let one drop pass your lips, and you
will spend the rest of your life under the waves. Here is the enchanted
ring. Put it in your pocket."
With these words, the Witch took from a little leather purse a simple
golden ring and handed it to the youngest son, who put the ring in his
pocket, thanked the Witch, and set off for the cavern, which led to the
City under the Sea. You may be sure it did not take him very long to
find it. After feeling carefully in his pocket to see if the ring was
still safe, the sailor plunged on into the winding cave. In a short
time, the roar of the breakers on the beach, which had been loud at the
mouth of the cavern, began to fade and grow faint, and the tunnel grew
dark and cold. Feeling for the wall of the passage with one hand, the
youngest son advanced into the blackness. Creatures of the sea, with
round shining eyes, stared at him from shallow pools, and now and then
his hand, running along the wall, would touch and shake from its place a
starfish or great snail.
Down and down and down went the sailor. Presently he heard the lapping
of wavelets in the darkness, and a few minutes after, he felt himself
advancing into deepening water. Stopping for an instant, he put on the
golden ring. Then, walking on again, he felt the water rise from his
ankles to his waist, and from his waist to his throat. One step more,
and the water closed over his head.
Once under the waves, the sailor hesitated, uncertain as to which way to
turn. Little by little, however, his eyes grew accustomed to the touch
of the water, and he saw, lying on the bottom a few feet ahead of him, a
small ball glowing with a pale phosphorescent light. Stooping to touch
this strange object, the sailor discovered it to be a small round
sea-plant which had anchored itself to a stone, and presently he
discovered that this light was but one of thousands which together
formed a long straight line across the level floor of the sea. Rightly
imagining these lights to be signs of a sea-world road, the sailor
advanced along them. A slow walk of ten long leagues brought him to the
gate of the City under the Sea.
There was very little light there, save for that which came through the
waters from the world above, and this was but a faint, pale green glow,
which lay, more like a shadow than a light on the roofs and tower-tops
of the submerged town.
The sailor walked unchallenged through the gate, and found himself in
the great street of the city. Along the broad avenue grew giant
sea-plants with brown leaves, set out in rows like trees; and through
the foliage which moved heavily in the currents, little fish darted like
birds. Many people walked slowly to and fro--strange people of the sea,
all dressed alike in tight-fitting garments of shining, fish-like
scales.
The sailor looked into their faces and saw that a broad golden ring
encircled the pupils of their eyes. Suddenly two men of the sea,
distinguished from the others by swords of red stone, moved through the
water, and seizing the sailor in their webbed hands, hurried him before
the King of the Under-Waters.
On a coral throne, in a great hall roofed with a high circular dome, sat
the King. The flowing waters within were bright, and a queer, pale green
light pierced through the hall from a kind of fountain of light in the
centre of the floor under the dome. Approaching this shining fountain,
the sailor discovered it to be a mass of glowing sea-creatures, living
flowers of the deep, which, even as he looked, stirred their mysterious
petals.
"Welcome, Wearer of the Enchanted Ring," said the King, staring hard at
the sailor with his large golden eyes. "You come at a fortunate time.
This very evening we celebrate the wedding of the second of my three
daughters with the mortal wearer of the second ring. Stand you upon the
steps of the throne, for they are coming at once. Let the trumpets
sound!"
At this command, two youths of the sea lifted huge conch-shells to their
mouths and sounded them.
Great doors instantly opened wide, and a gorgeous procession entered.
First, appeared a dozen pages; then, in walked the Sea King's second
daughter, hand in hand with a merry young man, in whom the sailor
recognized his second oldest brother.
Presently the conch-shells sounded again.
"The Prince and the Princess!" cried a voice.
The King leaned over from his throne and whispered in the sailor's
ear:--
"My eldest daughter and her husband. They were married just a year ago.
The Prince is a youth of the world above, and wears the first of the
enchanted rings."
Now entered the eldest Princess of the Sea, walking by the side of her
husband. And in the husband the young sailor beheld the elder of his two
brothers. And though the young sailor stretched out his arms to them,
neither of his brothers remembered him, for while faint and hungry, they
had forgotten the warning of the Witch of the Sands and had eaten of the
bread of the under-world. Thus had the memory of the world above, the
lost emerald, and their father's plight faded away.
The conches sounded a third time.
"Come to the wedding banquet," cried the King. "You shall sit beside my
youngest daughter."
And now the sailor lad, willy nilly, was hurried into the banquet hall,
and seated at the royal table beside the King's youngest daughter. And
she was quite the most beautiful of all the three. Noticing that the
youngest son touched no food, she said to him:--
"Why do you refuse to taste of the wedding banquet?"
"Princess," replied the sailor, "I have come to the Under-Waters to seek
the Emerald of the Sea; for if I return to my own country without it, my
father's life will be forfeited. Would you have me forget?"
"But you will never find the Emerald of the Sea!" cried the Princess.
"Never find the Emerald of the Sea! What do you mean?" said the sailor
anxiously.
"The Emerald of the Sea has disappeared," continued the little Princess,
fixing the sailor with her golden eyes. "Years ago it was stolen from my
father's treasury by a wicked Prince of the Under-Waters. My father
pursued him and overthrew him, but in the struggle the emerald was lost,
and rising to the surface, drifted to the shores of the Land of the
Dawn. There it remained till the Prince of the Unknown Isles purchased
it and took it away in his black ship. This ship, overcome by a storm,
sank; but where it lies we know not, though we have searched far and
wide through the waters. Whosoever finds it shall be master of the land
under the sea, for the emerald is master of us all. My father will not
lift a finger to help you find it; indeed, if he knows that you are in
search of it, he will force you to eat of the bread of the under-waters.
Say nothing, therefore, of your quest."
At these words, the brave sailor's heart sank very low. Mindful of the
Witch's warning, he dared touch no morsel of food, yet he knew that
hunger would soon bring weakness in its train. Either he must find the
emerald at once, or he must abandon all hope of finding it. He could not
live long if he touched no food, and if but one morsel touched his lips
he would forget the upper world.
Far away, the poor merchant, whom the King had now cast in prison,
watched the days pass one by one, and the last year approach its end.
Every morning he would ask for tidings of his sailor son, and ask in
vain.
Now, when the wedding banquet was over, and the ball which followed was
at its height, the eldest of the princesses called her sister, the
bride, aside and said to her:--
"We must rid ourselves at once of this newcomer. Do you not see that he
is the younger brother of our husbands? I beheld him stretch out his
arms to them as they passed. Who can tell but that he may lead them away
from us? Let us tell our servants to lie in wait for him and deliver us
from such a danger."
So said the eldest sister, of the golden eyes. Alas, I fear that the
people of the under-waters are sometimes quite as shocking as those of
the world above.
Later that evening, just as the poor sailor was standing by one of the
great doors, a dozen or so stout rogues in the service of the eldest
sister fell upon him, bound him with cords, and dragged him through the
water to the royal stables.
Now the people of the under-waters, having no horses,--for sea horses
are but tiny creatures,--had tamed great dolphins to carry them about. A
hundred of these monsters, each with a bronze ring in his nose, were
ranged along the sides of the stables, and on the fiercest and angriest
of them all, the Princess's servants tied the sailor. How the great
fish, fastened to a bar by a chain and his nose-ring, pulled, rolled,
swerved aside, and thrashed his tail! But all his twistings were of no
avail, for the poor sailor lad was soon fastened to his back with a rope
of seaweed. Then the creature was released from his chain, given a blow
on the side with a whip of shark-skin, and turned into the wilds of the
under-waters.
For half an hour, the fish, frightened at his burden, fled at lightning
speed over the roofs of the city, and sped on into the lonely plain.
Then, ceasing his mad flight, he tried again to shake himself free of
the sailor. He turned, he leaped, he dived, but all in vain, for the
sailor was securely fastened to his back. Terrified anew, with a swift
motion of his great fins, he shot violently to one side and rushed on
and on into the dark. All that long night he fled. Toward the morning of
the next day, however, the sailor managed to work one arm free, and draw
the cutlass from his waist. With this he made short work of his bonds
and rolled off the fish's back. The great animal, delivered of the
weight which had lain upon it, rose on the tip of its tail and shot
madly toward the surface, and the sailor tumbled through the waters to
the bottom.
Weak and hungry, the poor young seaman gazed about in the half-gloom,
and found himself on the lower slopes of a sunken mountain rising from
the ocean floor. In no direction could he find a sign of the City under
the Sea. Hoping, however, to see better from the mountain's top, he
decided to climb it. Strange plants and shells lay in the crevices of
the weedy rocks, schools of bright fish fled past him like living
arrows, and huge crabs scuttled away as he appeared. Suddenly, lying on
her side in a little ravine of the mountain, he saw a ship--the black
ship of the Emerald of the Sea! Weary and weak though he was, it took
the sailor but a moment to clamber aboard, and hurry past the broken
masts into the captain's cabin. A steady, green radiance shone in one
corner of the weedy room, and hastening toward it, the sailor found, at
last, the Emerald of the Sea. The box which had enclosed it had rotted
away and fallen apart.
"Victory!" cried the sailor, "victory! The emerald is mine at last, and
I shall save my father."
He took the great jewel from the broken box and rested it in the cup of
his two hands. How it glowed on the pale flesh! Then, thrusting it into
a pocket and holding onto it with one hand, he hurried out again to the
mountainside.
In the world above, it was high noon, and the level rays of the sun beat
deep into the green waters. So bright had the slope become, that the
sailor lad felt sure that he could not be far from the surface of the
waves. Moreover, if the mountain-top rose above the waters, it would
form an island in the upper world. And so, indeed, it was. Climbing on
toward the top of the mountain, the sailor first scaled a steep cliff,
and at the top of this he found a gentle slope of sand. The sun's rays
now illumined the water so brightly that the air seemed only a little
distance away. Presently a beach-crab ran nimbly away from beneath the
sailor's feet. The water grew very much warmer. The shore was at hand! A
few steps more, and the youngest son emerged on the beach of a beautiful
isle.
Half-blinded by the sun, he walked toward the dry land. There he found
some delicious fruits growing, and a rippling brook of crystal water. He
ate and drank, and his strength returned.
Himself again, the sailor took the Emerald of the Sea in his hands, and
"By the power of the Emerald of the Sea, I summon here the two elder
princesses of the under-waters, and my two brothers, their husbands!"
There was a sound of far thunder under the clear blue sky, and a moment
later, four heads rose out of the waters, and shaking the salt spray
from their eyes, the princesses and the brothers walked through the
shallows to where the sailor was standing. Now, the princesses were very
much frightened when they beheld the sailor holding the all-powerful
emerald, and falling on their knees before him, begged him to forgive
their misdeeds, and not to take away their loved ones. Tears fell from
their golden eyes, and mingled with the drops of the salt ocean still
coursing down their black scales. As for the brothers, they would have
hurled themselves upon the sailor, had not the magic force of the
emerald prevented their approach.
"Be merciful and forgive," said the younger of the sisters. "After all,
had we not caused you to be spirited away, you never would have found
the emerald."
"Yes, that is true," said the sailor. "My brothers shall decide for
themselves. Break, then, the spell which binds them to the under-waters,
restore to them their memory of the past, and if then they choose to
remain, I shall not try to lead them away. Reverse the spell!"
"That is easily done," said the elder sister.  "Let them but touch the
food or drink of the upper world and their memory will return."
And in less time than it takes to tell it, the sisters offered the
enchanted brothers water from the rivulet. When they had drunk of it,
both the brothers became pale as death, their eyes opened wide, and they
stared as strangely as men suddenly waked from sleep. Then, seeing their
younger brother, they ran to him and threw their arms about him, and
asked a thousand questions about their father and the quest of the
emerald.
The golden-eyed brides watched them with sad faces, and finally broke
into quiet tears. Imagine their joy, when their husbands returned to
them and bade them be of good cheer.
Thus was true love found to be mightier than the mightiest spell.
Now, when the princesses of the sea had dried their tears, the sailor
and his brothers took counsel as to how the Emerald of the Sea might be
brought to the King in time to save their father's life. You may judge
of the sailor's horror when he discovered that because of a bad error in
the calendars and clocks of Sixes and Sevens (a city he had visited in
his search for the emerald), the life of his father had been forfeited
to the King three days before!
But now we must return to the poor merchant himself.
All the third year the poor man had lain in a small cell in the royal
dungeons, waiting anxiously, oh, so anxiously, to hear the quick step of
the sailor son on the winding stairs just outside his prison door. But
the year came to an end, as you know, without his return. For the third
and last time, the castle guards led the poor man before the King. Now
the King had never forgiven the merchant for the loss of the jewel; his
chagrin, indeed, had increased with the years, and he was very glad that
he could at last take his revenge.
"Have you found the Emerald of the Sea?" said the King, harshly. He
stood erect on the steps of his judgment-seat, arms folded, eyes fixed
in a fierce, black frown.
"No," said the merchant quietly.
"Then you shall seek for it yourself," cried the King. And he gave
orders that the merchant be tied hand and foot, and tossed into a little
boat without food or drink, and then sent adrift to die helplessly in
the lonely seas. And so this awful sentence was carried out.
Bound hand and foot, scarce able to roll from side to side, the merchant
lay motionless in his little craft and stared up at the blue sky.
Presently a merciful sleep overcame him, and while he slept, a wind
arose which swept the little boat along with it.
Meanwhile, on the beautiful island, the sailor and his companions,
stunned at their discovery, began preparations to return to the
under-waters. Just as the twilight fell, all walked together to the
margin of the darkening sea, and advanced into the waves.
Suddenly, the sailor, whose eyes were the keenest, saw a little boat
rapidly drifting ashore. Now caught in a current of the shallow beach,
it drifted sideways; now propelled by the rising tide, it floated on,
bow pointed to the shore. The sailor hurried toward it and seized it.
Suddenly he uttered a ringing cry! The old merchant lay on the floor of
the boat. He still lived, for they could see him gently breathing.
Lifting him up tenderly, the three sons carried him to the shore,
unloosed his bonds, and brought him back to life.
Now when the merchant was himself again, the sailor, through the power
of the emerald, caused the waves to carry a great ship to the island,
and on this ship the three sons, the two princesses, and the old
merchant returned to the merchant's country. All landed secretly,
however, for they knew that the angry King would seize them if he knew
of their return. And so it came to pass that, one night, shortly after
the homecoming, word was brought to the sailor that the King had heard
of the merchant's escape and was sending guards to arrest the merchant
and his companions.
It was almost midnight when the sailor lad received the warning. Taking
the emerald with him, he advanced to a window by the ocean, and cried
out over the moonlit waters,--
"Waters of the Sea, rise and overwhelm the palace of the King!"
Now the King's palace stood apart by itself on a tongue of land running
far out into the tide, and soon the rising waters were flowing over the
marble floors and pouring in through the windows. One by one, the lights
in the thousand rooms, touched by the waves, hissed, sputtered, and
expired. The servants of the palace, one and all, ran away pell-mell,
and left the dark castle to its fate. Little by little the advancing
water crept from the walls to the balconies, from the balconies to the
towers, and from the foot of the towers to their very tops. Finally, all
the moon could see as it shone upon the flood was the weather-vane of
the highest turret of all. You should have seen the little waves ripple
and break about it! And finally, even the weather-vane disappeared under
the black waves.
Locked in his secret treasure-room, opening the jewel coffers one after
the other, the King remained quite ignorant of the disaster. For some
time no sound reached him in his hidden retreat, because the door of the
treasure-room was very thick and strong. Suddenly he heard behind him
the sound of falling water, and turning toward the door, beheld streams
of water gushing through the passages between the door and its frame.
Horror-struck, he watched the door burst from its locks and hinges; a
roaring cascade of cold sea-water came pouring in the room, and a moment
later the whole castle crumbled and fell to pieces.
Now, when the King had met his deserts, the people of the country, who
greatly respected the merchant, offered him the crown; but he refused it
and conferred it on his two elder sons. Thus it came to pass that the
country had two kings. Each brother in turn reigned for six months of
every year, and spent the other six under the sea with the golden-eyed
people of the waters.
As for the sailor lad, he sailed the sea for many years, and finally
married a pretty niece of the Witch of the Sands. Then, like all
sailors, he went to the country to live. His house is built of gray
stone, ivy climbs over it, and apple orchards lie beneath its windows.
And the all lived happily ever after.
THE LAUGHING PRINCE
The Story of the Boy Who Could Talk Nonsense
There was once a farmer who had three sons and one little daughter. The
eldest son was a studious boy who learned so much out of books that the
farmer said:
"We must send Mihailo to school and make a priest of him."
The second boy was a trader. Whatever you had he would get it from you
by offering you something else for it. And always what he gave you was
worth less than what you gave him.
"Jakov will make a fine peddler," the farmer said. "He's industrious and
sharp and some day he will probably be a rich man."
But Stefan, the farmer's youngest son, had no special talent and because
he didn't spend all his time with his nose in a book and because he
never made the best of a bargain his brothers scorned him. Militza, his
little sister, loved him dearly for he was kind and jolly and in the
evening he was always ready to tell her stories and play with her. But
the farmer, of course, listened to the older brothers.
"I don't know about poor Stefan," he used to say. "He's a good boy but
he talks nonsense. I suppose he'll have to stay on the farm and work."
Now the truth is the farm was a fine place for Stefan for he was strong
and lusty and he liked to plow and harvest and he had a wonderful way
with the animals. He talked to them as if they were human beings and the
horses all whinnied when he came near, and the cows rubbed their soft
noses against his shoulder, and as for the pigs--they loved him so much
that whenever they saw him they used to run squealing between his legs.
"Stefan is nothing but a farmer!" Mihailo used to say as though being a
farmer was something to be ashamed of.
And Jakov said:
"If the village people could see the pigs following him about, how
they'd laugh at him! I hope when I go to the village to live he won't be
visiting me all the time!"
Another thing the older brothers couldn't understand about Stefan was
why he was always laughing and joking. He did the work of two men but
whether he was working or resting you could always hear him cracking his
merry jokes and laughing his jolly laugh.
"I think he's foolish!" Mihailo said.
Jakov hoped that the village people wouldn't hear about his carryings
on.
"They'd laugh at him," he said, "and they'd laugh at us, too, because
we're his brothers."
But Stefan didn't care. The more they frowned at him, the louder he
laughed, and in spite of their dark looks he kept on cracking his merry
jokes and talking nonsense. And every evening after supper his little
sister, Militza, clapped her hands and cried:
"Now, Stefan, tell me a story! Tell me a story!"
"Father," Mihailo would say, "you ought to make him keep quiet! He's
foolish and all he does is fill Militza's head with nonsense!"
This always made Militza very indignant and she would stamp her little
foot and say:
"He isn't foolish! He knows more than any one! And he can do more things
than any one else and he's the handsomest brother in the world!"
You see Militza loved Stefan dearly and when you love a person of course
you think that person is wonderful. But the father supposed that Mihailo
must be right for Mihailo studied in books. So he shook his head and
sighed every time he thought of Stefan.
Now the kingdom in which the three brothers lived was ruled over by a
great Tsar who had an only daughter. In disappointment that he had no
son, the Tsar was having his daughter brought up as though she were a
boy. He sent all over the world for tutors and teachers and had the poor
girl taught statecraft and law and philosophy and all the other things
that the heir to the throne ought to know.
The Princess because she was an obedient girl and because she loved her
father tried to spend all her time in study. But the dry old scholars
whom the Tsar employed as teachers were not amusing companions for a
young girl and the first lady-in-waiting who was in constant attendance
was scarcely any better for she, too, was old and thin and very prim.
If the poor little Princess between her geography lesson and her
arithmetic lesson would peep for a moment into a mirror, the first
lady-in-waiting would tap her arm reprovingly and say:
"My dear, vanity is not becoming in a princess!"
One day the little Princess lost her temper and answered sharply:
"But I'm a girl even if I am a princess and I love to look in mirrors
and I love to make myself pretty and I'd love to go to a ball every
night of my life and dance with handsome young men!"
"You talk like the daughter of a farmer!" the first lady-in-waiting
Then the Princess, because she lost her temper still further, said
something she should not have said.
"I wish I were the daughter of a farmer!" she declared. "Then I could
wear pretty ribbons and go dancing and the boys would come courting me!
As it is I have to spend all my time with funny old men and silly old
women!"
Now even if her tutors and teachers were funny looking old men, even if
the first lady-in-waiting was a silly old woman, the Princess should not
have said so. It hurt the feelings of the first lady-in-waiting and made
her angry and she ran off to the Tsar at once and complained most
"Is this my reward after all my years of loving service to your
daughter?" she asked. "It is true that I've grown old and thin looking
after her manners and now she calls me a silly old woman! And all the
learned wise men and scholars that you have gathered from the far
corners of the earth--she points her finger at them and calls them funny
old men!"
The fact is they were funny looking, most of them, but yet the first
lady-in-waiting was right: the Princess should not have said so.
"And think of her ingratitude to yourself, O Tsar!" the first
lady-in-waiting continued. "You plan to make her the heir to your throne
and yet she says she wishes she were a farmer's daughter so that she
could deck herself out in ribbons and have the boys come courting her! A
nice thing for a princess to say!"
The Tsar when he heard this fell into an awful rage. (The truth is
whatever temper the Princess had she inherited direct from her father.)
"Wow! Wow!" he roared, just that way. "Send the Princess to me at once.
I'll soon have her singing another tune!"
So the first lady-in-waiting sent the Princess to her father and as soon
as he saw her he began roaring again and saying:
"Wow! Wow! What do you mean--funny old men and silly old women?"
Now whenever the Tsar began roaring and saying, "Wow! Wow!" the Princess
always stiffened, and instead of being the sweet and obedient daughter
she usually was she became obstinate. Her pretty eyes would flash and
her soft pretty face would harden and people would whisper: "Mercy on
us, how much she looks like her father!"
"That's just what I mean!" the Princess said. "They're a lot of funny
old men and silly old women and I'm tired of them! I want to be amused!
I want to laugh!"
"Wow! Wow! Wow!" roared the Tsar. "A fine princess you are! Go straight
back to the schoolroom and behave yourself!"
So the little Princess marched out of the throne room holding her head
very high and looking so much like the Tsar that the first
lady-in-waiting was positively frightened.
The Princess went back to the schoolroom but she did not behave herself.
She was really very naughty. When the poor man who knew more than
anybody in the world about the influence of the stars upon the destinies
of nations came to give her a lesson, she threw his book out the window.
When the superannuated old general who was teaching her military
manoeuvers offered her a diagram on which the enemy was represented by
a series of black dots and our soldiers by a series of red dots, she
took the paper and tore it in two. And worst of all when the old scholar
who was teaching her Turkish--for a princess must be able to speak all
languages--dropped his horn spectacles on the floor, she deliberately
stepped on them and broke them.
When the Tsar heard all these things he just wow-wowed something
terrible.
"Lock that young woman in her chamber!" he ordered. "Feed her on bread
and water until she's ready to apologize!"
But the Princess, far from being frightened by this treatment, calmly
announced:
"I won't eat even your old bread and water until you send me some one
who will make me laugh!"
Now this frightened the Tsar because he knew how obstinate the Princess
could be on occasions. (He ought to know, too, for the Princess had that
streak of obstinacy direct from himself.)
"This will never do!" he said.
He hurried to the Princess's chamber. He found her in bed with her
pretty hair spread out on the pillow like a golden fan.
"My dear," the Tsar said, "I was joking. You don't have to eat only
bread and water. You may have anything you want."
"Thank you," the Princess said, "but I'll never eat another bite of
anything until you send me some one who will make me laugh. I'm tired of
living in this gloomy old castle with a lot of old men and old women who
do nothing but instruct me and with a father who always loses his
temper and says, 'Wow! Wow!'"
"But it's a beautiful castle!" the poor Tsar said. "And I'm sure we're
all doing our very best to educate you!"
"But I want to be amused as well as educated!" the little Princess said.
And then, because she felt she was going to cry, she turned her face to
the wall and wouldn't say another word.
What was the Tsar to do? He called together his councilors and asked
them how was the Princess to be made to laugh. The councilors were wise
about state matters but not one of them could suggest a means of amusing
the Princess. The Master of Ceremonies did indeed begin to say something
about a nice young man but instantly the Tsar roared out such a
wrathful, "Wow! Wow!" that the Master of Ceremonies coughed and
pretended he hadn't spoken.
Then the Tsar called together the scholars and the teachers and the
first lady-in-waiting. He glared at them savagely and roared:
"Wow! Wow! A nice lot you are! I put you in charge of my daughter and
not one of you has sense enough to know that the poor child needs a
little amusement! I have a good mind to have you all thrown into the
dungeon!"
"But, Your Majesty," quavered one poor old scholar, "I was not employed
as a buffoon but as a teacher of astrology!"
"And I," another said, "as a teacher of languages!"
"And I as a teacher of philosophy!"
"Silence!" roared the Tsar. "Between you all you have about killed my
poor child! Now I ask you: With all your learning doesn't one of you
know how to make a young girl laugh?"
Apparently not one of them did, for no one answered.
"Not even you?" the Tsar said, looking at the first lady-in-waiting.
"When you called me to Court," the first lady-in-waiting answered,
drawing herself up in a most refined manner, "you said you wished me to
teach your daughter etiquette. As you said nothing about amusement,
quite naturally I confined myself to the subject of behavior. If I do
say it myself, no one has ever been more devoted to duty than I. I am
constantly saying to her: 'That isn't the way a princess should act!' In
fact for years there has hardly been a moment in the day when I haven't
corrected her for something!"
"Poor child!" groaned the Tsar. "No wonder she wants a change! Oh, what
fools you all are in spite of your learning! Don't you know that a young
girl is a young girl even if she is a Princess!"
Well, the scholars weren't any more help to the Tsar than the
councilors, and finally in desperation he sent heralds through the land
to announce that to any one who could make the Princess laugh he would
give three bags of gold.
Three bags of gold don't grow on the bushes every day and instantly all
the youths and men and old men who had stories that their sweethearts
and their wives and their daughters laughed at hurried to the castle.
One by one they were admitted to the Princess's chamber. They entered
hopefully but when they saw the Tsar sitting at one side of the door
muttering, "Wow! Wow!" in his beard, and the old first lady-in-waiting
at the other side of the door watching them scornfully, and the Princess
herself in bed with her lovely hair spread out like a golden fan on the
pillow, they forgot their funny stories and hemmed and hawed and
stammered and had finally, one after another, to be turned out in
disgrace.
One day went by and two and three and still the Princess refused to eat.
In despair the Tsar sent out his heralds again. This time he said that
to any one who would make the Princess laugh he would give the
Princess's hand in marriage and make him joint heir to the kingdom.
"I had expected to wed her to the son of some great Tsar," he sighed,
"but I'd rather marry her to a farmer than see her die of starvation!"
The heralds rode far and wide until every one, even the people on the
most distant farms, had heard of the Tsar's offer.
"I won't try again," said Mihailo, the oldest son of the farmer I've
already told you about. "When I went there the day before yesterday I
began telling her a funny story out of my Latin book but instead of
laughing she said: 'Oh, send him away!' So now she'll have to starve to
death for all of me!"
"Me, too!" said Jakov, the second son. "When I tried to tell her that
funny story of how I traded the moldy oats for the old widow's fat pig,
instead of laughing she looked me straight in the face and said:
'Cheat!'"
"Stefan ought to go," Mihailo suggested. "Maybe she'd laugh at him!
Everybody else does!"
He spoke sneeringly but Stefan only smiled.
"Who knows? Perhaps I will go. If I do make her laugh then, O my
brothers, the laugh will be on you for I shall become Tsar and you two
will be known as my two poor brothers. Ho! Ho! Ho! What a joke that
would be!"
Stefan laughed loud and heartily and his little sister joined him, but
his brothers looked at him sourly.
"He grows more foolish all the time!" they told each other.
When they were gone to bed, Militza slipped over to Stefan and whispered
in his ear:
"Brother, you must go to the Princess. Tell her the story that begins:
In my young days when I was an old, old man.... I think she'll just
have to laugh, and if she laughs then she can eat and she must be very
hungry by this time."
At first Stefan said no, he wouldn't go, but Militza insisted and
finally, to please her, he said he would.
So early the next morning he dressed himself in his fine Sunday shirt
with its blue and red embroidery. He put on his bright red Sunday sash
and his long shiny boots. Then he mounted his horse and before his
brothers were awake rode off to the Tsar's castle.
There he awaited his turn to be admitted to the Princess's chamber. When
he came in he was so young and healthy and vigorous that he seemed to
bring with him a little of the freshness of outdoors. The first
lady-in-waiting looked at him askance for without doubt he was a farmer
lad and his table manners probably were not good. Well, he was a farmer
lad and for that reason he didn't know that she was first
lady-in-waiting. He glanced at her once and thought: "What an ugly old
woman!" and thereafter he didn't think of her at all. He glanced
likewise at the Tsar and the Tsar reminded him of a bull of his own. He
wasn't afraid of the bull, so why be afraid of the Tsar?
Suddenly he saw the Princess lying in bed with her lovely hair spread
out on the pillow like a golden fan and for a moment he couldn't speak.
Then he knelt beside the bed and kissed her hand.
"Princess," he said, "I'm not learned and I'm not clever and I don't
suppose I can succeed where so many wise men have failed. And even if I
do make you laugh you won't have to marry me unless you want to because
the reason I really came was to please Militza."
"Militza?"
"Yes, Princess, my little sister, Militza. She loves me very much and so
she thinks the stories I tell are funny and she laughs at them. Last
night she said to me: 'Stefan, you must go to the Princess and tell her
the story that begins: In my young days when I was an old, old
man.... I think she'll just have to laugh and if she laughs then she
can eat and she must be very hungry by this time.'"
"I am," the Princess said, with a catch in her voice. Then she added: "I
think I like that little sister of yours and I think I like you, too. I
wish you would tell me the story that begins: In my young days when I
was an old, old man...."
"But, Princess, it's a very foolish story."
"The foolisher, the better!"
Just here the first lady-in-waiting tried to correct the Princess for of
course she should have said: "The more foolish, the better!" but the
Tsar shut her up with a black frown and one fierce, "Wow!"
"Well, then," Stefan began:
In my young days when I was an old, old man I used to count my bees
every morning. It was easy enough to count the bees but not the beehives
because I had too many hives. One day when I finished counting I found
that my best bee was missing. At once I saddled a rooster and set out to
find him.
"Father!" cried the Princess. "Did you hear what Stefan said? He said he
saddled his rooster!"
"Umph!" muttered the Tsar, and the first lady-in-waiting said severely:
"Princess, do not interrupt! Young man, continue."
His track led to the sea which I rode across on a bridge. The first
thing I saw on the other side of the sea was my bee. There he was in a
field of millet harnessed to a plow. "That's my bee!" I shouted to the
man who was driving him. "Is that so?" the man said, and without any
words he gave me back my bee and handed me a bag of millet to pay for
the plowing. I took the bag and tied it securely on the bee. Then I
unsaddled the rooster and mounted the bee. The rooster, poor thing, was
so tired that I had to take him by the hand and lead him along beside
us.
"Father!" the Princess cried, "did you hear that? He took the rooster by
the hand! Isn't that funny!"
"Umph!" grunted the Tsar, and the first lady-in-waiting whispered:
"Hush! Let the young man finish!"
Whilst we were crossing the bridge, the string of the bag broke and all
my millet spilled out. When night came I tied the rooster to the bee and
lay down on the seashore to sleep. During the night some wolves came
and killed my bee and when I woke up I found that all the honey had run
out of his body. There was so much honey that it rose up and up until it
reached the ankles of the valleys and the knees of the mountains. I took
a hatchet and swam down to a forest where I found two deer leaping about
on one leg. I shot at the deer with my hatchet, killed them, and skinned
them. With the skins I made two leather bottles. I filled these with the
honey and strapped them over the rooster's back. Then I rode home. I no
sooner arrived home than my father was born. "We must have holy water
for the christening," I said. "I suppose I must go to heaven to fetch
some." But how was I to get there? I thought of my millet. Sure enough
the dampness had made it grow so well that its tops now reached the sky.
So all I had to do was to climb a millet stalk and there I was in
heaven. Up there they had mown down some of my millet which they baked
into a loaf and were eating with boiled milk. "That's my millet!" I
said. "What do you want for it?" they asked me. "I want some holy water
to christen my father who has just been born." So they gave me some holy
water and I prepared to descend again to earth. But on earth there was a
violent storm going on and the wind carried away my millet. So there I
was with no way of getting down. I thought of my hair. It was so long
that when I stood up it covered my ears and when I lay down it reached
all the way to earth. So I pulled out a hair, tied it to a tree of
heaven, and began descending by it. When it grew dark I made a knot in
the hair and just sat where I was. It was cold, so I took a needle which
I happened to have in my coat, split it up, and lighted a fire with the
chips.
"Oh, father!" the Princess cried, "Stefan says he split a needle into
kindling wood! Isn't he funny!"
"If you ask me--" the first lady-in-waiting began, but before she could
say more the Tsar reached over and stepped on her toe so hard that she
was forced to end her sentence with a little squeally, "Ouch!" The
Princess, you see, was smiling and the Tsar was hoping that presently
she would burst into a laugh. So he motioned Stefan to continue.
[Illustration: Stefan Tells the Princess a Story]
Then I lay down beside the fire and fell asleep. While I slept a spark
from the fire fell on the hair and burned it through. I fell to earth
with such force that I sank into the ground up to my chest. I couldn't
budge, so I was forced to go home and get a spade and dig myself out. On
the way home I crossed a field where the reapers were cutting corn.
The heat was so great that they had to stop work. "I'll get our mare," I
said, "and then you'll feel cooler." You know our mare is two days long
and as broad as midnight and she has willow trees growing on her back.
So I ran and got her and she cast such a cool shadow that the reapers
were at once able to go back to work. Now they wanted some fresh
drinking water, but when they went to the river they found it had frozen
over. They came back to me and asked me would I get them some water.
"Certainly," I said. I went to the river myself, then I took off my head
and with it I broke a hole in the ice. After that it was easy enough to
fetch them some water. "But where is your head?" they asked. "Oh!" I
said, "I must have forgotten it!"
"Oh, father!" the Princess cried with a loud laugh, "he says he forgot
his head! Then, Stefan, what did you do? What did you do?"
I ran back to the river and got there just as a fox was sniffing at my
skull. "Hi, there!" I said, pulling the fox's tail. The fox turned
around and gave me a paper on which was written these words: =NOW THE
PRINCESS CAN EAT FOR SHE HAS LAUGHED AND STEFAN AND HIS LITTLE SISTER
ARE VERY HAPPY.=
"What nonsense!" the first lady-in-waiting murmured with a toss of her
"Yes, beautiful nonsense!" the Princess cried, clapping her hands and
going off into peal after peal of merry laughter. "Isn't it beautiful
nonsense, father? And isn't Stefan a dear lad? And, father, I'm awfully
hungry! Please have some food sent in at once and Stefan must stay and
eat with me."
So the Tsar had great trays of food brought in: roast birds and
vegetables and wheaten bread and many kinds of little cakes and honey
and milk and fruit. And Stefan and the Princess ate and made merry and
the Tsar joined them and even the first lady-in-waiting took one little
cake which she crumbled in her handkerchief in a most refined manner.
Then Stefan rose to go and the Tsar said to him:
"Stefan, I will reward you richly. You have made the Princess laugh and
besides you have not insisted on her marrying you. You are a fine lad
and I shall never forget you."
"But, father," the Princess said, "I don't want Stefan to go. He amuses
me and I like him. He said I needn't marry him unless I wanted to but,
father, I think I want to."
"Wow! Wow!" the Tsar roared. "What! My daughter marry the son of a
farmer!"
"Now, father," the Princess said, "it's no use your wow-wowing at me
and you know it isn't. If I can't marry Stefan I won't marry any one.
And if I don't marry any one I'm going to stop eating again. So that's
that!" And still holding Stefan's hand, the Princess turned her face to
the wall.
What could the poor Tsar do? At first he fumed and raged but as usual
after a day or two he came around to the Princess's way of thinking. In
fact it soon seemed to him that Stefan had been his choice from the
first and when one of his councilors remarked: "Then, Your Majesty,
there's no use sending word to the neighboring kings that the Princess
has reached a marriageable age and would like to look over their sons,"
the Tsar flew into an awful temper and roared:
"Wow! Wow! You blockhead! Neighboring kings, indeed, and their
good-for-nothing sons! No, siree! The husband I want for my daughter is
an honest farmer lad who knows how to work and how to play! That's the
kind of son-in-law we need in this kingdom!"
So Stefan and the little Princess were married and from that day the
castle was no longer gloomy but rang with laughter and merriment.
Presently the people of the kingdom, following the example of their
rulers, were laughing, too, and cracking jokes and, strange to say, they
soon found they were working all the better for their jollity.
Laughter grew so fashionable that even Mihailo and Jakov were forced to
take it up. They didn't do it very well but they practised at it
conscientiously. Whenever people talked about Stefan, they always pushed
forward importantly and said:
"Ho! Ho! Ho! Do you mean Stefan, the Laughing Prince? Ha! Ha! Ha! Why,
do you know, he's our own brother!"
As for Militza, the Princess had her come to the castle and said to her:
"I owe all my happiness to you, my dear, for you it was who knew that of
course I would laugh at Stefan's nonsense! What sensible girl
wouldn't?"
BEAUTY AND THE HORNS
The Story of an Enchanted Maiden
There was once a rich man who when he was dying called his son to his
bedside and said:
"Danilo, my son, I am leaving you my riches. The only thing I ask of you
is this: close your ears to all reports of an enchanted maiden who is
known as Peerless Beauty and when the time comes that you wish to marry
choose for wife some quiet sensible girl of your native village."
Now if the father had not mentioned Peerless Beauty all might have been
well. Danilo might never have heard of her and after a time he would
probably have fallen in love with a girl of his native village and
married her. As it was, after his father's death he kept saying to
himself:
"Peerless Beauty, the enchanted maiden of whom my father warned me! I
wonder is she really as beautiful as all that! I wonder where she
lives!"
He thought about her until he could think of nothing else.
"Peerless Beauty! Peerless Beauty! Oh, I must see this enchanted maiden
even if it costs me my life!"
His father had a brother, a wise old man, who was supposed to know
everything in the world.
"I will go to my uncle," the young man said. "Perhaps he will tell me
where I can find Peerless Beauty."
So he went to his uncle and said:
"My dear uncle, my father as he lay dying told me about a wonderful
maiden called Peerless Beauty. Can you tell me where she lives because I
want to see her for myself and judge whether she is as beautiful as my
father said."
His uncle looked at him gravely and shook his head.
"My poor boy, how can I tell you where that enchanted maiden lives when
I know it would mean death to you if ever you saw her? Think no more
about her but go, find some suitable maid in the village, and marry her
like a sensible young man."
But his uncle's words, far from dissuading Danilo, only excited him the
more.
"If my uncle knows where Peerless Beauty lives," he thought, "other men
also know."
So one by one he went to all the old men in the village and asked them
what they knew of Peerless Beauty. One by one they shook their heads and
told him that Peerless Beauty was no maiden for him to be thinking
"Put her out of your mind," they said. "These enchanted maidens are a
snare to young men. What you want to do is marry some quiet industrious
girl here in the village and settle down like a sensible young man."
But the oftener Danilo heard this advice, the more firmly convinced he
became that it was just what he did not want to do.
"Time enough to settle down after I've seen Peerless Beauty," he told
himself. "She must be beautiful indeed, or all these old men would not
be so anxious to keep me from seeing her. Well, if they won't tell me
where she is, I'll go out in the world and find her for myself."
So he put on rich clothes as befitted his wealth, took a bag of the gold
his father had left him, mounted his horse, and rode off into the world.
Everywhere he went he made inquiries about Peerless Beauty and
everywhere he found old men who knew about the enchanted maiden but
would tell him nothing. Every one of them advised him to go home like a
sensible young man and think no more about her. But all they said only
made him the more determined to see the maiden for himself.
Finally one day as evening approached he came to a little hut in the
woods. At the door of the hut sat a poor old woman. She held out her
hand as he passed and begged an alms. Danilo, being a kind hearted young
man, gave her a gold piece.
"May God reward you!" the old woman said.
"Granny," Danilo asked, "can you tell me the way to Peerless Beauty?"
"Aye, my son, that I can but he is a rash youth who seeks that maiden!
It were better for you to turn back than to go on!"
"But I'm not going to turn back!" Danilo declared. "Whatever the outcome
I'm going to find Peerless Beauty and see for myself why all men fear
When the old woman saw that Danilo was determined, she gave up pleading
with him and pointed out a faint trail in the forest which, she told
him, would lead him to Peerless Beauty's castle.
He slept that night in the old woman's hut and early next morning set
out on the forest trail. By afternoon he reached the castle.
"What do you want?" the guards demanded roughly.
"I want to see Peerless Beauty."
"Have you gold?" they asked him.
Danilo showed them his bag of ducats.
They led him into a hall of the castle and told him to put his gold on a
table. If he did so, perhaps Peerless Beauty would show herself and
perhaps she wouldn't.
Danilo did as the guards directed and then faced a curtain behind which,
they told him, Peerless Beauty was seated. The curtain opened a little,
but instead of showing her face Peerless Beauty extended only one
finger. However, that finger was so ravishingly beautiful that Danilo
almost fainted with delight. He would have stayed gazing on that one
enchanting finger for hours if the guards had not taken him roughly by
the shoulders and thrown him out of the castle.
"Come again when you've got more gold!" they shouted after him.
Like a man in a dream Danilo rode back to the old woman's hut.
"Now, my son, are you satisfied?" she asked him. "Are you ready now to
go home and settle down like a sensible young man?"
"Oh, granny!" Danilo raved. "Such a finger! I must see that finger again
if it cost me my whole fortune!"
He slept that night in the old woman's hut and the next day returned to
his native village. There he got another bag of the golden ducats which
his father had left him and at once started back to the castle of
Peerless Beauty.
This time that heartless maiden stripped him again of his gold, showed
him two of her enchanting fingers, and as before had her guards throw
him out of the castle.
That's exactly what the poor young man did. He went back and back until
the fortune that his father had left him was entirely squandered. And
all he had seen of Peerless Beauty up to that time were the fingers of
one hand! Shouldn't you suppose that now with all his wealth lost he
would get over his foolish infatuation? Well, he didn't.
"I must go back again!" he kept telling himself.
His gold was gone but he still had his father's house. It was a big old
house with garrets and cellars.
"Perhaps if I hunt I shall find some treasures hidden away in odd
corners," Danilo said.
So he hunted upstairs and down. He opened old boxes and rummaged about
among the dark rafters. One day he came upon a funny looking little cap.
"I wonder whose this was," he thought to himself.
He went to a mirror and tried the cap on. Then a strange thing happened.
The moment the cap touched his head, Danilo disappeared.
"Ah!" he cried, "it's a magic cap and the moment I put it on I become
invisible! Now I can slip into Peerless Beauty's chamber and see her
lovely face!"
With his magic cap pulled tightly down over his forehead, he set off
once more for Peerless Beauty's castle. Sure enough he was able to pass
unseen the guards at the gate, he was able to go boldly into the great
hall, and beyond it through the curtain into Peerless Beauty's own
chamber.
The Beauty was seated with her back to the curtain and a serving maid
was combing out her hair for the night. It was lovely hair and it fell
down over Beauty's shoulders like a mantle of gold. At mere sight of it
Danilo was so overcome with emotion that he sighed.
"What's that?" Beauty cried. "There's some one in my chamber!"
The serving maid looked under the bed and behind the chairs and in the
corners.
"There's no one here, my lady."
"That's strange!" Beauty said. "I feel as though some one were looking
at me."
When Danilo saw the actual face of the enchanted maiden, it was all he
could do to keep from crying aloud. She was so unutterably beautiful
that he almost swooned away in ecstacy.
Presently the maiden went to bed and fell into an uneasy sleep. The
light of a single candle shed a faint radiance over her face making it
lovelier than ever. Through all the long hours of night Danilo stood
perfectly still, gazing at her, afraid almost to breathe lest he should
disturb her.
"Unless I win her for wife," he thought to himself, "I shall nevermore
be happy!"
When morning came the maiden awoke with a start and said:
"There's some one looking at me! Who is it? Who is it?"
"It's only your poor Danilo," a voice answered.
"Danilo? Who is Danilo?"
"The youth whom you have been treating so cruelly. But though you have
treated me cruelly, I love you still!"
"If you love me still," the maiden said, "let me see you."
Danilo took off the magic cap and there he stood, a handsome youth, at
the foot of her bed. Then the crafty maiden spoke him fair and Danilo
told her about the magic cap, and when she said to him that she repented
having treated him so cruelly and asked him to let her see the cap, the
poor young man was so dazzled by her beauty and her seeming kindness
that he handed it to her at once.
Instantly she clapped it on her head and disappeared. Then she laughed
in derision and called out loudly to the guards:
"Ho, there! Take out this young man and drive him forth! Let him return
when he has another treasure to offer me!"
So the guards dragged Danilo out and drove him away.
With no more gold, with no more magic cap, Danilo returned to his
father's house.
"Perhaps there are other treasures hidden away," he thought. "I'll
search further."
In his search he came upon an old pitcher and thinking it might be
silver he began rubbing it. Instantly there was a clap of thunder and a
company of soldiers appeared. Their captain saluted Danilo respectfully
"We are the servants of that magic pitcher. What does our master wish?"
"Magic pitcher?" stammered Danilo. "And am I your master?"
"Yes," said the captain, "you are our master as long as you hold the
magic pitcher in your hands."
"You may disappear now," Danilo said. "I will rub the pitcher when I
need you."
Delighted with this unexpected good fortune, he hurried off to the woods
to the hut of the old woman who had befriended him before. He showed her
the pitcher and demonstrated for her how it worked. Then he asked her to
carry a message to Peerless Beauty.
"Tell her," he said, "that unless she consents to marry me at once I'll
lead a mighty army against her, take her captive, and then send her off
in exile to that howling wilderness which people call the Donkeys'
Paradise."
"I will deliver your message," the old woman said, "on condition that
you promise me to be on your guard this time. Don't let the maiden trick
you again. She is under an enchantment that makes her cruel and crafty
and the enchantment will never be broken until she meets a man upon whom
her wiles have no effect."
"Trust me this time," Danilo said. "I've had my lesson."
So the old woman delivered the message and when Peerless Beauty
received it with scorn, Danilo at once set out for the castle with the
magic pitcher in his hand. He began rubbing and every time he rubbed a
company of soldiers appeared. Soon the castle was surrounded by a great
army and in fright and dismay Peerless Beauty sent out word that she was
ready to make an unconditional surrender.
When Danilo entered the castle he found her humble and meek.
"I have treated you cruelly," she said. "Now I am in your power, do with
me what you will." And she began weeping softly until the sight of her
tears drove Danilo distracted.
"Weep no more, dear lady!" he cried. "You have nothing to fear from me!
I love you! I am your slave!"
The Peerless one slowly dried her tears.
"If you love me as you say you do, you will tell me by what magic you
have raised this great army."
Then Danilo, forgetting the old woman's warning, took the magic pitcher
out of his shirt and showed the maiden how it worked.
"Ah!" she murmured wonderingly. "It looks like any old pitcher! Please,
Danilo, let me see it in my own hands."
Danilo handed her the pitcher and, quick as a flash, she rubbed it.
There was a clap of thunder, a company of soldiers appeared, and their
captain saluting her respectfully said:
"What does the mistress of the pitcher want?"
"Nay!" cried Danilo, "it is I who own the pitcher, not she!"
"We are the servants," the captain said, "of whoever holds the pitcher."
At that Peerless Beauty laughed loud and scornfully until the castle
rang with her merriment.
"Seize that wretch!" she said, pointing to Danilo. "Tie his hands and
drive him out in exile to the Donkeys' Paradise! Let him stay there
until he has another treasure to present me!"
So they drove Danilo out to the wilderness and left him there.
He wandered about for many days hungry and thirsty, subsisting on roots
and berries, and having for drink only the water that collected in the
hoof prints of the wild beasts.
"See what I've come to!" he cried aloud. "Why didn't I heed the old
woman's warning! If I had, I should have broken the evil enchantment
that binds my Peerless Beauty and all would have been well!"
One day as he wandered about he came upon a vine that was laden with
great clusters of luscious red grapes. He fell upon them ravenously and
ate bunch after bunch. Suddenly he felt something in his hair and
lifting his hands he found that horns had grown out all over his head.
"Fine grapes these are!" he exclaimed, "to bring out horns on a person's
head!"
However, he was so hungry that he kept on eating until his head was one
mass of horns.
The next day he found a vine that had clusters of white grapes. He began
eating the white grapes and he hadn't finished a bunch before the horns
all fell off his head.
"Ha!" he said. "The red grapes put horns on and the white grapes take
them off! That's a trick worth knowing!"
He took some reeds and fashioned two baskets one of which he filled with
red grapes and the other with white grapes. Then staining his face with
the dark juice of a leaf until he looked brown and sunburned like a
countryman, he went back to Peerless Beauty's castle. There he marched
up and down below the Peerless one's window crying his wares like a
huckster:
"Sweet grapes for sale! Who wants my fresh sweet grapes!"
Now it was not the season for grapes, so Peerless Beauty when she heard
the cry was surprised and said to her serving maid:
"Go quickly and buy me some grapes from that huckster and mind you don't
eat one yourself!"
The serving maid hurried out to Danilo and he sold her some of the red
grapes. As she carried them in, she couldn't resist the temptation of
slipping a few into her mouth. Instantly some horns grew out on her
"That's to punish me for disobeying my mistress!" the poor girl cried.
"Oh, dear, what shall I do?"
She was afraid to show herself to Peerless Beauty, so she pretended she
was taken sick and she went to bed and pulled the sheet over her head
and sent in the grapes by another serving maid.
Peerless Beauty ate them all before she discovered their frightful
property. Then there was a great to-do, and cries of anger and of
fright, and a quick sending out of the guards to find the huckster. But
the huckster had disappeared.
What could Peerless Beauty do now? She tried to pull the horns out but
they wouldn't come. She tried to cut them off but they resisted the edge
of the sharpest knife. She was too proud to show herself with horns, so
she swathed her head with jewels and ribbons and pretended she was
wearing an elaborate head-dress.
Then she sent heralds through the land offering a huge reward to any one
who could cure her serving maid of some strange horns that had grown out
on her head. You see she thought if she could get hold of some one who
would cure the maid, then she could make him cure her, too.
Well, doctors and quacks and all sorts of people came and tried every
kind of remedy, but all in vain. The horns stayed firmly rooted.
A whole week went by and when the last of the quacks had come and gone,
Danilo, disguised as an old physician, presented himself and craved
audience with the Peerless one. He carried two small jars in his hands
one of which was filled with a conserve made from the white grapes and
the other with a conserve made from the red grapes.
Peerless Beauty, her horns swathed in silk and gleaming with jewels,
received him coldly.
"Are you one more quack?" she asked.
"Not a quack," he said, bowing low, "but a man who has happened upon a
strange secret of nature. I can cure your serving maid of her horns
provided she confess to me all her misdeeds and hand over to me anything
she has that does not belong to her."
Peerless Beauty had him shown to the room where the serving maid lay in
bed. The poor frightened girl at once confessed that she had stolen a
few of her mistress's grapes and eaten them. Danilo spoke kindly to her,
gave her some of the white grape conserve, and as soon as she had tasted
it the horns of course dropped off.
Thereupon Peerless Beauty led Danilo to her own chamber, ordered all her
people out, and then acknowledged that she, too, was suffering from
horns.
"I am sure I can cure you," Danilo told her, "provided you confess to me
all your misdeeds and hand over to me whatever you have that belongs to
some one else."
"I cheated a foolish young man out of five bags of gold," Peerless
Beauty said. "Here they are in this chest. Take them."
Danilo opened the chest and took out his own five bags of gold.
"Is that all?" he asked.
[Illustration: The Magic Pitcher]
"Yes, that is all."
Danilo gave her some of the red grape conserve and of course, instead of
the horns already on her head falling off, more grew on.
"You're not telling me the truth," Danilo said, "and I can't cure you.
There's no use my treating you further."
He turned to go and Peerless Beauty, in great fright, begged him to
stay.
"I do remember another misdeed," she confessed. "I took by trickery a
magic pitcher from the same foolish young man."
She gave Danilo the pitcher and he hid it in his shirt.
"Is that all?"
Danilo gave her some more of the red grape conserve and, of course, more
horns grew out on her head. Then he pretended to get angry.
"How can you expect to be cured when you don't tell me the truth? I told
you I could not cure you unless you confessed all!"
Peerless Beauty wanted much to keep the magic cap but when the strange
physician thundered and scowled and threatened again to leave her, more
horned than ever, she acknowledged that she had taken the cap, too, and
handed it over.
This time Danilo gave her some of the white grape conserve and as soon
as she had eaten it all the horns fell off and her head shimmered and
shone as of old with her beautiful hair.
Then Danilo told her who he was and at once the maiden sought to ensnare
him again with her wiles.
"What a wonderful man you are, Danilo! I could love you now if you loved
me, but I know of course that you will never love me again after the
cruel way I have treated you!"
"But I do love you!" Danilo cried. "I do love you!"
"No, you don't!" she said, and she pretended to weep. "If you did love
me, you'd tell me where you found those red grapes and what this magic
conserve is made of. But of course you don't love me enough to tell me."
Because she looked more beautiful than ever with the tears on her lovely
cheeks, Danilo was about to tell her what she wanted to know when he
remembered the old woman's warning. That was enough. He hardened his
heart and declared:
"No! I'll never tell you! Do you hear me: I'll never tell you!"
She wept and implored him and used all her wiles, but Danilo remembering
the past was firm. And presently he had the reward that a man always has
when he's firm, for as soon as it was evident that she could no longer
befool him, the evil enchantment that bound her broke with a snap and
Peerless Beauty became a human maiden as gentle and sweet and loving as
she was beautiful.
She knelt at Danilo's feet and humbly begged his pardon and promised, if
he would still marry her, to make him the most dutiful wife in the
So Danilo married Peerless Beauty and with the servants of the magic
pitcher transported her and her castle and her riches together with the
old woman who had befriended them both to his own native village. There
he still lives happy and prosperous.
His uncle and all the old men in the village take credit to themselves
for the success of his adventures.
"It is due entirely to us," they tell any one who will listen to them,
"that Danilo went out in search of Peerless Beauty in the first place.
When he came to us and asked our advice we said to him: 'Go, by all
means! You're young and brave and of course you'll win her!' If we
hadn't urged him to go, he would probably have settled down here at
home, married some quiet village girl, and never be heard of again!"
That's how the old men talk now, but we know what they really did say at
the time!
Yet after all that doesn't matter. All that matters is that Danilo and
Peerless Beauty love each other and are happy.
THE PIGEON'S BRIDE
The Story of a Princess Who Kissed and Told
There was once a King who had an only daughter. She was as lovely as a
princess ought to be and by the time she reached a marriageable age the
fame of her beauty had spread far and wide over all the world.
Neighboring kings and even distant ones were already sending envoys to
her father's court begging permission to offer their sons as suitors to
the Princess's hand. As he had no son of his own the Princess's father
was delighted that the day was fast approaching when he might have a
son-in-law, and long before even the name of any particular prince was
discussed the Princess's mother had planned the wedding down to its last
detail.
The Princess alone was uninterested.
"I'm not ready to get married yet," she'd say to her parents every day
when they'd begin telling her about the various princes who were anxious
to gain her favor. "Why such haste? I'm young and there's plenty of
time. Besides, just now I'm too busy with my embroidery to be bothered
with a crowd of young men."
With that, before the King could reprove her, the Princess would throw
her arms about his neck, kiss him under the corner of his mustache, and
go flying off to the tower-room where she had her embroidery frame.
Her mother, the Queen, was much upset by the Princess's attitude.
"In my youth," she said, "girls were not like this. We were brought up
to think that courtship and marriage were the most important events in
our lives. I don't know what's getting into the heads of the young girls
nowadays!"
But the King, who was still smiling from the tickling little kiss which
the Princess had planted under the corner of his mustache, always
answered:
"Tut! Tut! We needn't worry yet! Take my word for it when some
particular young man comes along she'll be interested fast enough!"
At this the Queen, ending the discussion every day with the same words,
would shake her head and declare:
"I tell you it isn't natural for a girl to be more interested in
embroidery than in a long line of handsome young suitors!"
The Princess was interested in her embroidery--there's no doubt about
that. She spent every moment she could in the tower-room, working and
singing. The tower was high up among the treetops. It was reached by
winding stairs so narrow and so many that no one any older than the
Princess would care to climb them. The Princess flew up them like a
bird, scarcely pausing for breath. At the top of the stairs was a
trap-door which was the only means of entrance into the tower-room. Once
in the tower-room with the bolt of the trap-door securely fastened, the
Princess was safe from interruption and could work away at her
embroidery to her heart's content. The tower had windows on all sides,
so the Princess as she sat at her embroidery frame could look out north,
east, south, and west.
The clouds sailed by in the sky, the wind blew and at once the leaves in
the treetops began murmuring and whispering among themselves, and the
birds that went flying all over the world would often alight on some
branch near the tower and sing to the Princess as she worked or chatter
some exciting story that she could almost understand.
"What!" the Princess would think to herself as she looked out north,
east, south, and west. "Leave my tower and my beautiful embroidery to
become the wife of some conceited young man! Never!"
From this remark you can understand perfectly well that the particular
young man of whom her father spoke had not yet come along. And I'm sure
you'll also know that shutting herself up in the tower-room and bolting
the trap-door was not going to keep him away when it was time for him to
come. Yet I don't believe that you'd have recognized him when he did
come any more than the Princess did. This is how it happened:
One afternoon when as usual she was working at her embroidery and
singing as she worked, suddenly there was a flutter of wings at the
eastern window and a lovely Pigeon came flying into the room. It circled
three times about the Princess's head and then alighted on the
embroidery frame. The Princess reached out her hand and the bird,
instead of taking fright, allowed her to stroke its gleaming neck. Then
she took it gently in her hands and fondled it to her bosom, kissing its
bill and smoothing its plumage with her lips.
"You beautiful thing!" she cried. "How I love you!"
"If you really love me," the Pigeon said, "have a bowl of milk here at
this same hour to-morrow and then we'll see what we'll see."
With that the bird spread its wings and flew out the western window.
The Princess was so excited that for the rest of the afternoon she
forgot her embroidery.
"Did the Pigeon really speak?" she asked herself as she stood staring
out the western window, "or have I been dreaming?"
The next day when she climbed the winding stairs she went slowly for she
carried in her hands a brimming bowl of milk.
"Of course it won't come again!" she said, and she made herself sit down
quietly before the embroidery frame and work just as though she expected
But exactly at the same hour as the day before there was a flutter of
wings at the eastern window, the sound of a gentle coo! coo! and there
was the Pigeon ready to be loved and caressed.
"You beautiful creature!" the Princess cried, kissing its coral beak and
smoothing its neck with her lips, "how I love you! And see, I have
brought you the bowl of milk that you asked for!"
The bird flew over to the bowl, poised for a moment on its brim, then
splashed into the milk as though to take a bath.
The Princess laughed and clapped her hands and then, as she looked, she
saw a strange thing happen. The bird's feathers opened like a shirt and
out of the feather shirt stepped a handsome youth.
(You remember I told you how surprised the Princess was going to be.
And you're surprised, too, aren't you?)
He was so handsome that all the Princess could say was, "Oh!"
He came slowly towards her and knelt before her.
"Dear Princess," he said, "do not be frightened. If it had not been for
your sweet words yesterday when you said you loved me I should never
have been able to leave this feather shirt. Do not turn from me now
because I am a man and not a pigeon. Love me still if you can, for I
love you. It was because I fell in love with you yesterday when I saw
you working at your embroidery that I flew in by the open window and let
you caress me."
For a long time the Princess could only stare at the kneeling youth, too
amazed to speak. He was so handsome that she forgot all about the pigeon
he used to be, she forgot her embroidery, she forgot everything. She
hadn't supposed that any young man in the whole world could be so
handsome! Why, just looking at him, she could be happy forever and ever
and ever!
"Would you rather I were still a pigeon?" the young man asked.
"No! No! No!" the Princess cried. "I like you ever so much better this
way!"
The young man gravely bowed his head and kissed her hand and the
Princess blushed and trembled and wished he would do it again. She had
never imagined that any kiss could be so wonderful!
They passed the afternoon together and it seemed to the Princess it was
the happiest afternoon of all her life. As the sun was sinking the youth
"Now I must leave you and become a pigeon again."
"But you'll come back, won't you?" the Princess begged.
"Yes, I'll come back to-morrow but on one condition: that you don't tell
any one about me. I'll come back every day at the same hour but if ever
you tell about me then I won't be able to come back any more."
"I'll never tell!" the Princess promised.
Then the youth kissed her tenderly, dipped himself in the milk, went
back into his feather shirt, and flew off as a pigeon.
The next day he came again and the next and the next and the Princess
fell so madly in love with him that all day long and all night long,
too, she thought of nothing else. She no longer touched her embroidery
but day after day sat idle in the tower-room just awaiting the hour of
his arrival. And every day it seemed to the King and the Queen and all
the people about the Court that the Princess was becoming more and more
beautiful. Her cheeks kept growing pinker, her eyes brighter, her lovely
hair more golden.
"I must say sitting at that foolish embroidery agrees with her," the
King said.
"No, it isn't that," the Queen told him. "It's the big bowl of milk she
drinks every afternoon. You know milk is very good for the complexion."
"Milk indeed!" murmured the Princess to herself, and she blushed rosier
than ever at thought of her wonderful secret.
But a princess can't keep growing more and more beautiful without
everybody in the world hearing about it. The neighboring kings soon
began to feel angry and suspicious.
"What ails this Princess?" they asked among themselves. "Isn't one of
our sons good enough for her? Is she waiting for the King of Persia to
come as a suitor or what? Let us stand together on our rights and demand
to know why she won't consider one of our sons!"
So they sent envoys to the Princess's father and he saw at once that the
matter had become serious.
"My dear," he said to the Princess, "your mother and I have humored you
long enough. It is high time that you had a husband and I insist that
you allow the sons of neighboring kings to be presented to you next
week."
"I won't do it!" the Princess declared. "I'm not interested in the sons
of the neighboring kings and that's all there is about it!"
Her father looked at her severely.
"Is that the way for a princess to talk? Persist in this foolishness and
you may embroil your country in war!"
"I don't care!" the Princess cried, bursting into tears. "I can't marry
any of them, so why let them be presented?"
"Why can't you marry any of them?"
"I just can't!" the Princess insisted.
At first, in spite of the pleadings of both parents, she would tell them
no more, but her mother kept questioning her until at last in
self-defense the Princess confessed that she had a true love who came to
her in the tower every afternoon in the form of a pigeon.
"He's a prince," she told them, "the son of a distant king. At present
he is under an enchantment that turns him into a pigeon. When the
enchantment is broken he is coming as a prince to marry me."
"My poor child!" the Queen cried. "Think no more about this Pigeon
Prince! The enchantment may last a hundred years and then where will you
"But he is my love!" the Princess declared, "and if I can't have him I
won't have any one!"
When the King found that nothing they could say would move her from this
resolution, he sighed and murmured:
"Very well, my dear. If it must be so, it must be. This afternoon when
your lover comes, bring him down to me that I may talk to him."
But that afternoon the Pigeon did not come. Nor the next afternoon
either, nor the next, and then too late the Princess remembered his
warning that if she told about him he could never come back.
So now she sat in the tower-room idle and heartbroken, reproaching
herself that she had betrayed her lover and praying God to forgive her
and send him back to her. And the roses faded from her cheeks and her
eyes grew dull and the people about the Court began wondering why they
had ever thought her the most beautiful princess in the world.
At last she went to the King, her father, and said:
"As my love can no longer come back to me because I forgot my promise
and betrayed him, I must go out into the world and hunt him. Unless I
find him life will not be worth the living. So do not oppose me,
father, but help me. Have three pairs of iron shoes made for me and
three iron staffs. I will wander over the wide world until these are
worn out and then, if by that time I have not found him, I will come
home to you."
So the King had three pairs of iron shoes made for the Princess and
three iron staffs and she set forth on her quest. She traveled through
towns and cities and many kingdoms, over rough mountains and desert
places, looking everywhere for her enchanted love. But nowhere could she
find any trace of him.
At the end of the first year she had worn out the first pair of iron
shoes and the first iron staff. At the end of the second year she had
worn out the second pair of iron shoes and the second iron staff. At the
end of the third year, when she had worn out the third pair of iron
shoes and the third staff, she returned to her father's palace looking
thin and worn and sad.
"My poor child," the King said, "I hope now you realize that the Pigeon
Prince is gone forever. Think no more about him. Go back to your
embroidery and when the roses begin blooming in your cheeks again we'll
find some young prince for you who isn't enchanted."
But the Princess shook her head.
"Let me try one thing more, father," she begged, "and then if I don't
find my love I'll do as you say."
The King agreed to this.
"Well, then," the Princess said, "build a public bath-house and have the
heralds proclaim that the King's daughter will sit at the entrance and
will allow any one to bathe free of charge who will tell her the story
of the strangest thing he has ever heard or seen."
So the King built the bath-house and sent out his heralds far and wide.
Men and women from all over the world came and bathed and told the
Princess stories of this marvel and that, but never, alas, a word of an
enchanted pigeon.
The days went by and the Princess grew more and more discouraged.
"Isn't it sad," the courtiers began whispering, "how the Princess has
lost her looks! Do you suppose she ever was really beautiful or did we
just imagine it?"
And the neighboring kings when they heard this remarked softly among
themselves:
"It's just as well we didn't hurry one of our sons into a marriage with
this young woman!"
[Illustration: The Princess Kissed Its Coral Beak]
Now there was a poor widow who lived near the bath-house. She had a
daughter, a pretty young girl, who used to sit at the window and watch
the Princess as people came and told her their stories.
"Mother," the girl said one day, "every one in the world goes to the
bath-house and I want to go, too!"
"Nonsense!" the mother said. "What story could you tell the Princess?"
"But everybody else goes and I don't see why I can't!"
"Well, my dear," the mother promised, "you may just as soon as you see
or hear something strange. Talk no more about it now but go, fetch me a
pitcher of water from the town well."
The girl obediently took an empty pitcher and went to the town well.
Just as she had filled the pitcher she heard some one say:
"Mercy me, I fear I'll be late!"
She turned around and what do you think she saw? A rooster in wooden
shoes with a basket under his wing!
"I fear I'll be late! I fear I'll be late!" the rooster kept repeating
as he hurried off making a funny little clatter with his wooden shoes.
"How strange!" the girl thought to herself. "A rooster with wooden
shoes! I'm sure the Princess would love to hear about him! I'll follow
him and see what he does."
He went to a garden where he filled his basket with fresh
vegetables--with onions and beans and garlic. Then he hurried home to a
little house. The girl slipped in after him and hid behind the door.
"Thank goodness, I'm on time!" the rooster murmured.
He put a big bowl on the table and filled it with milk.
"There!" he said. "Now I'm ready for them!"
Presently twelve beautiful pigeons came flying in by the open door.
Eleven of them dipped in the bowl of milk, their feather shirts opened,
and out they stepped eleven handsome youths. But the Twelfth Pigeon
perched disconsolately on the windowsill and remained a pigeon. The
eleven laughed at him and said:
"Poor fellow, your bride betrayed you, didn't she? So you have to remain
shut up in your feather shirt while we go off and have a jolly time!"
"Yes," the Twelfth Pigeon said, "she broke her promise and now she goes
wandering up and down the world hunting for me. If she doesn't find me I
shall nevermore escape the feather shirt but shall have to fly about
forever as a pigeon. But I know she will find me for she will never
stop until she does. And when she finds me, then the enchantment will be
broken forever and I can marry her!"
The eleven youths went laughing arm in arm out of the house and in a few
moments the solitary Pigeon flew after them. Instantly the girl slipped
out from behind the door and hurried home with her pitcher of water.
Then she ran quickly across to the bath-house and all out of breath she
cried to the Princess:
"O Princess, I have such a wonderful story to tell you all about a
rooster with wooden shoes and twelve pigeons only eleven of them are not
pigeons but handsome young men and the twelfth one has to stay in his
feather shirt because--"
At mention of the enchanted pigeons, the Princess turned pale. She held
up her hand and made the girl pause until she had her breath, then she
questioned her until she knew the whole story.
"It must be my love!" the Princess thought to herself. "Thank God I have
found him at last!"
The next day at the same hour she went with the girl to the town well
and when the rooster clattered by in his wooden shoes they followed him
home and slipping into the house they hid behind the door and waited.
Presently twelve pigeons flew in. Eleven of them dipped in the milk and
came out handsome young men. The Twelfth sat disconsolately on the
window sill and remained a pigeon. The eleven laughed at him and twitted
him with having had a bride that had betrayed him. Then the eleven went
away laughing arm in arm. Before the Twelfth could fly after them, the
Princess ran out from behind the door and cried:
"My dear one, I have found you at last!"
The Pigeon flew into her hands and she took him and kissed his coral
beak and smoothed his gleaming plumage with her lips. Then she put him
in the milk and the feather shirt opened and her own true love stepped
She led him at once to her father and when the King found him well
trained in all the arts a prince should know he accepted him as his
future son-in-law and presented him to the people.
So after all the Princess's mother was able to give her daughter the
gorgeous wedding she had planned for years and years. Preparations were
begun at once but the Queen insisted on making such vast quantities of
little round cakes and candied fruits and sweetmeats of all kinds that
it was three whole months before the wedding actually took place. By
that time the roses were again blooming in the Princess's cheeks, her
eyes were brighter than before, and her long shining hair was more
golden than ever.
All the neighboring kings were invited to the wedding and when they saw
the bride they shook their heads sadly and said among themselves:
"Lost her looks indeed! What did people mean by saying such a thing?
Why, she's the most beautiful princess in the world! What a pity she
didn't marry one of our sons!"
But when they met the Prince of her choice, they saw at once why the
Princess had fallen in love with him.
"Any girl would!" they said.
It was a big wedding, as I told you before, and the only guest present
who was not a king or a queen or a royal personage of some sort was the
poor girl who saw the rooster with wooden shoes in the first place. The
Queen, of course, had wanted only royalty but the Princess declared that
the poor girl was her dear friend and would have to be invited. So the
Queen, when she saw that the Princess was set on having her own way, had
the poor girl come to the palace before the wedding and decked her out
in rich clothes until people were sure that she was some strange
princess whom the bride had met on her travels.
"My dear," whispered the Princess as they sat down beside each other at
the wedding feast, "how beautiful you look!"
"But I'm not as beautiful as you!" the girl said.
The Princess laughed.
"Of course not! No one can be as beautiful as I am because I have the
secret of beauty!"
"Dear Princess," the poor girl begged, "won't you tell me the secret of
beauty?"
The Princess leaned over and whispered something in the poor girl's ear.
It was only one word:
"Happiness!"
THE LITTLE LAME FOX
The Story of the Youngest Brother Who Found the Magic Grape-Vine and
Married the Golden Maiden
There was once a wealthy farmer who had three sons. The oldest was a
selfish overbearing fellow. The second was a weak chap who always did
everything his brother suggested. The youngest whose name was Janko was
not as bright and clever as his brothers but he was honest and,
moreover, he had a good heart and in this world a good heart, you know,
is more likely to bring its owner happiness than wicked brains.
"That booby!" the oldest brother would say whenever he saw Janko. And
the second would snicker and repeat the ugly word, "Booby!"
The father was proud of his three sons and happy to see them grow up
strong and healthy.
"They're good boys," he'd say to himself, "and I'm a fortunate father."
Now there was one very curious thing about this farmer that nobody
understood. One of his eyes was always laughing and the other was always
weeping.
"What's the matter with your father's eyes?" people used to ask the
sons.
The sons didn't know any more than any one else. One day they were in
the garden discussing the matter among themselves.
"Why don't we just go and ask him?" Janko suggested.
"If anybody is to ask him, I will!" declared the oldest brother
importantly.
So he went indoors to his father and said:
"Father, people are forever talking about your eyes. Now I wish you
would tell me why one of them is always laughing and the other always
weeping."
"My eyes, indeed!" cried the farmer, and in a rage he snatched up a
knife and hurled it straight at his son. The young man dodged aside and
fled and the knife stuck in the door jamb.
All out of breath the oldest brother returned to the others but of
course he was ashamed to tell them what had happened. So he said to
them:
"If you want to know what's the matter with father's eyes, you'll have
to ask him yourselves."
So the second brother went in to the farmer and he had exactly the same
experience. When he came out he gave his older brother a wink and said
to Janko:
"Now it is your turn, Booby. Father is waiting for you."
So Janko went in to his father and said:
"You have told my brothers why one of your eyes is always laughing and
the other always weeping. Now please tell me for I, too, want to know."
In a rage the farmer snatched up the knife again and lifted his arm to
hurl it. But Janko stood perfectly still. Why should he turn and run
away as though he had done something wrong? He had only asked his father
a civil question and if his father did not wish to answer it, he could
tell him so.
The farmer when he saw that the boy was not to be frightened smiled and
laid the knife aside.
"Thank God," he said, "I have one son who is not a coward! I have been
waiting these many years to have my sons ask me this very question. My
right eye laughs because God has blessed me and made me rich and has
allowed my three sons to grow to manhood, strong and healthy. My left
eye weeps because I can never forget a Magic Grape-Vine which once grew
in my garden. It used to give me a bucket of wine every hour of the
twenty-four! One night a thief came and stole my Magic Vine and I have
never heard of it since. Do you wonder that my left eye weeps at the
memory of this wonderful Vine? Alas, the bucket of wine that used to
flow out of it every hour of the day and night--I have never tasted its
like since!"
"Father," Janko said, "dry your weeping eye! I and my brothers will go
out into the world and find your Magic Grape-Vine wherever it is
hidden!"
With that Janko ran out to his brothers and when they heard what he had
to say they laughed and called him, "Booby!" and asked him didn't he
suppose that they had already planned to do just this thing. Of course
they hadn't, but they were so jealous and ill-natured that they couldn't
bear the thought of his being the first to suggest anything.
"We mustn't lose any more time," Janko said.
"It doesn't matter how much time you lose, Mr. Booby! As for us we two
are going to start out to-morrow at sunrise."
"But, brothers," Janko begged, "please let me go, too!"
"No!" they told him shortly. "You can stay home and look after the
farm!"
But their father when he heard the discussion said, no, Janko was also
to go as he was the bravest of them all. After that the brothers,
because they didn't want their father to tell how they had been afraid
and run away, had to agree.
So the next morning early the three of them started out, each with a
wallet well-stocked with food.
"How are we going to get rid of the Booby?" the second one whispered.
"Trust me!" the oldest one whispered back with a wink.
Presently they came to a crossroads where three roads branched. Now the
oldest brother knew that after a short distance two of the roads came
together again. So he motioned the second brother slyly that he was to
take the middle road. Then he said:
"Brothers, let us part here and each take a different road. Do you
agree?"
"Yes," the other two said, "we agree."
"Then suppose Janko take the left-hand road."
"And I'll take the middle road," the second cried.
"And I," the eldest said, "will take the one that's left. So farewell,
brothers, and let us meet here in a year's time."
"God bless us all," Janko called out, "and grant that one of us may find
our dear father's Magic Grape-Vine."
The two older brothers of course met in a short time when their roads
joined and they had a good laugh to think how they had outwitted the
Booby.
"Time enough to look for that old Grape-Vine when we've had a little
fun!" the eldest said. "Let us sit down here and eat a bite and then
push on to the next village. There's an inn there where we can try our
luck at cards."
So they sat down by the roadside, opened their wallets, and laid out
some bread and cheese. Just then a Little Lame Fox came limping up on
three feet, and whimpering and fawning it begged for something to eat.
"Get out!" bawled the older brother and the second, picking up a handful
of stones, threw them at the Fox.
The little animal shied and then came timidly back, again begging for
something to eat.
"Let's kill it!" cried one of the brothers.
They both jumped up and tried to strike the little creature with their
sticks. The Fox limped off and they followed, hitting at it as they ran
and always just missing it. It was so weak and lame that they expected
every minute to overtake it and so kept on chasing it until it had led
them pretty far into the woods. Then suddenly it disappeared and there
was nothing left for the brothers to do but make their way back to the
roadside grumbling and cursing. In their absence some shepherd dogs had
found their open wallets and eaten all their food. So now they really
had something to curse about.
Janko meanwhile had been trudging along steadily on the third road. At
last when he began to feel hungry, he sat down by the wayside and opened
his wallet. Instantly the same Little Lame Fox came limping up and
whimpered and fawned and begged for something to eat.
"You poor little creature," Janko said, "are you hungry?"
He held out his hand coaxingly and the animal gave it a timid sniff.
"Of course I'll give you something to eat," Janko said. "There's enough
for both of us."
With that he divided his bread and cheese and gave the Little Fox half.
Then they ate together and the Little Fox allowed Janko to pat her head.
When they finished eating the Fox sat up on her haunches and said:
"Now, Janko, tell me about yourself. Who are you and where are you
going?"
The Fox seemed such a sensible little person that it didn't surprise
Janko in the least to have her sit up and talk. Janko's brothers would
have said that he hadn't sense enough to be surprised. But he had a good
heart, Janko had, and as you'll soon hear a good heart is a much better
guide for conduct than wicked brains.
Janko answered the Fox simply and truthfully. He told about his father
and his two brothers and about his father's weeping eye and the Magic
Grape-Vine for which he and his brothers were gone in search.
"You've been good to me," the Little Fox said. "You've shared your bread
with me and that makes us friends. So from now on if you'll be a brother
to me, I'll be a little sister to you."
Goodness knows Janko's own brothers weren't very good to him, but Janko
understood what the Little Fox meant and he agreed.
"Well then, brother," the Fox said, "I know where that Grape-Vine is and
I'm going to help you to get it. If you do just as I say I don't believe
you'll have any trouble. Now take hold of my tail and away we'll go."
So Janko took hold of the Little Fox's tail and sure enough away they
went. Whether they sailed through the air or just ran fleetly along the
ground I don't know. But I do know that they went a great distance and
that when they stopped Janko didn't feel in the least tired or
breathless.
"Now, my brother," the Little Fox said, "listen carefully to what I tell
you. The king of this country has a wonderful garden. In the midst of it
your father's Grape-Vine is planted. We are close to the garden now. It
is protected by twelve watches each of which is composed of twelve
guards. To get to the Grape-Vine you will have to pass them all. Now as
you approach each watch look carefully. If the eyes of all the guards
are open and staring straight at you, have no fear. They sleep with
their eyes open and they won't see you. But if their eyes are closed,
then be careful for when their eyes are closed they are awake and ready
to see you. You will find the Grape-Vine in the very center of the
garden. Standing near it you will see two spades, a wooden spade and a
golden spade. Take the wooden spade and dig up the Vine as quickly as
you can. Under no condition touch the golden spade. Now, Janko, do you
understand?"
Yes, Janko thought he understood. He slipped into the garden and the
first thing he saw were twelve fierce looking guards who were staring at
him with great round eyes. He was much frightened until he remembered
that the Little Fox had said that if their eyes were open they were fast
asleep. So he picked up courage and walked straight by them and sure
enough they didn't see him. He passed watch after watch in the same way
and at last reached the center of the garden. He saw the Grape-Vine at
once. There was no mistaking it for at that very moment it was pouring
out wine of itself into a golden bucket. Near it were two spades, Janko
in great excitement snatched up the first that came to his hand and
began to dig. Alas, it was the golden spade and as Janko drove it into
the earth it sent out a loud ringing sound that instantly woke the
guards. They came running from all directions with their eyes tightly
closed for now, of course, they were awake. They caught Janko and
dragged him to the king to whom they said:
"A thief! A thief! We found him trying to steal your Magic Grape-Vine!"
"My Magic Grape-Vine!" thundered the king. "Young man, what do you mean
trying to steal my Magic Grape-Vine?"
"Well, you see," Janko answered simply, "the Grape-Vine really belongs
to my father. It was stolen from him years ago and ever since then his
left eye has wept over the loss of it. Give me the Vine, O king, for if
you don't I shall have to come back and try again to steal it for it
belongs to my father and I have sworn to get it!"
The king frowned in thought and at last he said:
"I can't give away my precious Grape-Vine for nothing, young man, but I
tell you what I'll do: I'll give it to you provided you get for me the
Golden Apple-Tree that bears buds, blossoms, and golden fruit every
twenty-four hours."
With that Janko was dismissed and turned out of the garden.
The Little Fox was waiting for him and Janko had the shame of confessing
that he had forgotten the warning about the golden spade and had been
caught.
"But the king says he will give me the Grape-Vine provided I get for him
the Golden Apple-Tree that bears buds, blossoms, and golden fruit every
"Well, brother," the Little Fox said, "you were good to me, so I'll help
you again. Take hold of my tail and away we'll go."
Janko took hold of the Little Fox's tail and away they went a greater
distance than before. In spite of going so quickly it took them a long
time but whether it was weeks or months I don't know. Whichever it was
when they stopped Janko didn't feel in the least tired or breathless.
"Now, brother," the Little Fox said, "here we are in another country
close to the king's garden where the Golden Apple-Tree grows. To reach
it you will have to pass twenty-four watches of twelve guards each.
Take care that you pass each guard as before when his eyes are wide open
and staring straight at you for that means he is asleep. When you reach
the Golden Apple-Tree you will see two long poles on the ground--a
wooden pole and a golden pole. Take the wooden pole and beat down some
of the golden fruit. Don't touch the golden pole. Remember!"
So Janko crept into the second garden and succeeded in passing all the
guards of the twenty-four watches when their eyes were wide open and
staring straight at him. He reached the Golden Apple-Tree and saw at
once the two long poles that were lying near it on the ground. Now
whether because he was excited or because he forgot what the Fox
said--he had a good heart, Janko had, but he was a little careless
sometimes--I don't know. But I do know that instead of taking the wooden
pole as the Fox had told him, he took the golden pole. At the first
stroke of the golden pole against the golden branches of the tree, the
golden branches sent out a loud clear whistle that woke all the sleeping
guards. Every last one of them came running to the Apple-Tree and in no
time at all they had captured poor Janko and carried him to their
master, the king.
"Trying to steal my Golden Apple-Tree, is he?" roared the king in a
great rage. "What do you want with my Golden Apple-Tree, young man?"
"Well, you see," Janko answered simply, "I have to have the Golden
Apple-Tree to exchange it for the Magic Grape-Vine that really belongs
left eye has wept over the loss of it. Give me the Golden Apple-Tree, O
king, for if you don't I shall have to come back and try again to steal
The king seemed impressed with Janko's words for after a moment he said:
"Janko, I can't give you the Golden Apple-Tree for nothing, but I tell
you what I'll do: I'll let you have it provided you get for me the
Golden Horse that can race around the world in twenty-four hours."
As usual the Little Fox was waiting for him and again Janko had the
shame of confessing that he had forgotten the warning about the golden
pole and had been caught.
"But the king says he will give me the Golden Apple-Tree provided I get
him the Golden Horse that can race around the world in twenty-four
hours. I wonder, dear Little Fox, will you help me again?"
"Yes, brother, I will help you again for you were good to me. Take hold
of my tail and away we'll go."
So Janko took hold of the Little Fox's tail and away they went. How far
they went and how long they were gone I don't know, but it was a great
distance and a long time. However they arrived without feeling in the
least tired or breathless.
"Now, brother," the Little Fox said, "this time listen carefully to what
I tell you. Here we are in another kingdom close to the king's own
stable where the Golden Horse is guarded by thirty-six watches of twelve
guards each. When night comes you must slip into the stable and pass all
those guards when they are asleep with their eyes wide open and staring
straight at you. When you reach the Golden Horse you will see hanging
beside him a golden bridle and a common bridle made of hempen rope. Slip
the hempen bridle over the Horse's head and lead him quietly out of the
stable. But mind you don't touch the golden bridle! This time don't
forget!"
Janko promised faithfully to remember what the Little Fox said and when
night came he crept into the stable and cautiously made his way through
the sleeping guards. He reached at last the stall of the Golden Horse.
It was the most beautiful horse in the world and the gleam of its
shining flanks was like sunshine in the dark stable.
Janko stroked its golden mane and whispered softly into its ear. The
horse responded to his touch and rubbed its muzzle against his shoulder.
Janko reached over to take the hempen bridle and then he paused. "It
would be an outrage," he thought to himself, "to put a common rope on
this glorious creature!"
Just think of it! For the third time Janko forgot the Little Fox's
warning! I have no excuse to make for him. I don't see how he could have
forgotten a third time! But he did. He took the golden bridle instead of
the hempen one and put it over the head of the Golden Horse. The Horse
neighed and instantly all the sleeping guards awoke and came running to
the stall. They caught Janko, of course, and when morning broke carried
him to their master, the king.
He questioned Janko as the others had done and Janko answered him
simply:
"You see I have to have the Golden Horse, O king, to exchange it for the
Golden Apple-Tree. And I have to have the Golden Apple-Tree to exchange
it for the Magic Grape-Vine that really belongs to my father. It was
stolen from him years ago and ever since then his left eye has wept over
the loss of it. Give me the Golden Horse, O king, for if you don't give
him to me I shall have to come back and try again to steal him."
"But, Janko," the king said, "I can't give you the Golden Horse for
nothing! But I tell you what I'll do: I will give him to you provided
you get for me the Golden Maiden who has never seen the sun."
With that Janko was dismissed and led out of the stable.
Janko really was awfully ashamed this time when he had again to confess
to the Little Fox that he had forgotten her warning and had touched the
golden bridle.
"Janko! Janko!" the Little Fox said. "Where are your wits! Now what
shall we do?"
Then Janko told the Little Fox of the king's offer:
"He will give me the Golden Horse provided I get for him the Golden
Maiden who has never seen the sun. Dear Little Fox, will you help me
this one time more? I know I am very stupid but I promise you faithfully
that this time I will not forget."
"Of course, brother," the Little Fox said, "I'll help you again. But
this will have to be the last time. If you forget this time I won't be
able to help you any more. Take hold of my tail and away we'll go."
So for the fourth time Janko took hold of the Little Fox's tail and away
they went. They went and they went--I can't tell you how far! But they
weren't tired when they arrived, they weren't even breathless.
"Now, brother," the Little Fox said, "listen carefully to what I tell
you. Here we are in another kingdom close to a great cavern where for
sixteen years the Golden Maiden has been kept a prisoner under the
enchantment of her wicked mother and never allowed to see the golden
light of the sun. There are forty-eight chambers in the cavern and each
chamber is guarded by a watch of twelve guards. Steal softly through
each chamber when the eyes of all the guards are wide open and staring
straight at you. In the last chamber of all you will find the Golden
Maiden playing in her Golden Cradle. Over the Cradle stands a fearful
ghost who will cry out to you to go away and threaten to kill you. But
don't be afraid. It is only an empty ghost which the wicked mother has
placed there to frighten men off from rescuing the Golden Maiden. Take
the Golden Maiden by the hand, put the Golden Cradle on your shoulder,
and hurry back to me. But one thing: As you leave each chamber be sure
to lock the door after you so that the guards when they wake cannot
follow you."
Janko crept into the cavern and cautiously made his way from chamber to
chamber through the wide-eyed guards. In the forty-eighth chamber he
found the Golden Maiden playing in her Golden Cradle. He ran to take her
when a horrible creature rose above the Cradle and in hollow tones
cried: "Back! Back! Back!" For a moment Janko was frightened, then he
remembered that the awful creature was only an empty ghost. So he went
boldly up to the Golden Cradle and sure enough the ghost faded away.
"You have come to rescue me, haven't you?" the Golden Maiden cried.
She gave Janko her hand and he helped her to her feet. Then he put the
Golden Cradle on his shoulder and together they hurried out from chamber
to chamber. And I am happy to tell you that this time Janko remembered
the Little Fox's warning and locked the door of every chamber as they
left it. So they reached the upper world safely and found the Little Fox
waiting for them.
"There's no time to lose," the Little Fox said. "Put the Cradle across
my back, Janko, and take hold of my tail with one hand and give your
other hand to the Golden Maiden and away we'll go."
Janko did as the Little Fox said and away they all three went.
When they reached the stable of the Golden Horse, the Little Fox said:
"It doesn't seem right to give the Golden Maiden to the king of the
Golden Horse unless she wants us to, does it?"
The Golden Maiden at once begged them to keep her.
"Don't give me to the king of the Golden Horse!" she said. "I want to
stay with Janko who has rescued me!"
"But unless I give up the Golden Maiden," Janko asked, "how can I get
the Golden Horse?"
"Perhaps I can help you," the Little Fox said. "Perhaps I can enchant
myself into looking like the Golden Maiden."
With that the Little Fox leaped up in the air, turned this way and that,
and lo! you might have thought her the Golden Maiden except that her
eyes were still fox's eyes.
"Now leave the Maiden outside here hidden in her Golden Cradle and take
me in to the master of the stable. Exchange me for the Golden Horse and
make off at once. Then pick up the Golden Maiden in her Golden Cradle
and ride away and soon I'll join you."
Janko did this very thing. He took in the fox maiden and exchanged her
for the Golden Horse and instantly rode off as the Little Fox had told
The king of the stable at once called all his courtiers together and
showed them the fox maiden.
"See," he said, "this is the Golden Maiden who has never seen the sun!
She is the most beautiful maiden in the world and she now belongs to
me!"
The courtiers looked at her and admired her, but one of them a little
keener than the others said:
"Yes, she's very beautiful and all that but look at her eyes. They don't
look like maiden's eyes but like fox's eyes!"
Instantly at the word fox the false maiden turned to a fox and went
scampering off.
"See what you've done!" cried the king in a fury. "You have changed my
Golden Maiden into a fox with your nonsense! You shall pay for this with
your life!" And he had him executed at once.
The Little Fox meantime had caught up with Janko and the Golden Maiden
and the Golden Horse. As they neared the garden of the king of the
Golden Apple-Tree the Fox said:
"It would be a pity to give away the Golden Horse. Rightly it belongs to
the Golden Maiden and was taken from her by her wicked mother."
"Don't give my Golden Horse away!" the Golden Maiden begged.
"But how else can I get the Golden Apple-Tree?" Janko asked.
myself into looking like the Golden Horse."
and lo! you might have thought her the Golden Horse except that her tail
was still a fox's tail.
When they reached the garden of the Golden Apple-Tree, Janko left the
Golden Horse and the Golden Maiden outside and took the fox horse in to
the king.
The king was delighted and at once had his servants deliver to Janko the
Golden Apple-Tree.
When Janko was safely gone, the king called all his courtiers together
and showed them the fox horse.
"See my Golden Horse!" he said. "Isn't it the most beautiful horse in
the world!"
"It is! It is!" they all told him.
But one courtier, a little keener than the rest, remarked:
"What a curious tail for a horse to have! It is like a fox's tail!"
At the word fox the false horse changed back into a fox and went
"See what you've done with your nonsense!" cried the king. "You have
lost me my Golden Horse and now you shall lose your own life!" And he
ordered the courtier to be executed at once.
The Fox soon caught up with the real Golden Horse and with Janko and the
Golden Maiden who were holding in their arms the Golden Cradle and the
"It will never do to give up the Golden Apple-Tree," the Fox said, "for
it, too, rightly belongs to the Golden Maiden. I'll have to see again if
I can help you."
So when they neared the garden of the Magic Grape-Vine, the Little Fox
leaped in the air, turned this way; and that, and lo! you might have
thought her the Golden Apple-Tree except that her fruit instead of being
round was long and pointed like a fox's head.
[Illustration: The Golden Maiden, the Farmer and the Empty Ghost]
Janko gave the king the fox tree and received in return the Magic
Grape-Vine that really belonged to his father and not to the king at
all. He hurried back to the Golden Maiden who was waiting for him with
the Golden Horse and the Golden Apple-Tree and the Golden Cradle and off
they all went.
The king was delighted with his fox tree and called his courtiers to
come and admire it.
"Beautiful! Beautiful!" they all said, and one of them examining the
fruit carefully remarked:
"But see these apples! They are not round like apples but long and
pointed like a fox's head!"
He had no sooner said the word fox than the tree turned into a fox and
went scampering off.
lost me my Golden Apple-Tree and now I shall lose you your head!" And he
When the Fox caught up with the Golden Horse, she said to Janko:
"Now, my brother, it is time for us to part. You have the Magic
Grape-Vine and soon your father's left eye will no longer weep. Besides,
you are carrying home the Golden Maiden on her own Golden Horse and with
her Golden Apple-Tree and her Golden Cradle. God has blessed you in your
undertaking and will continue to bless you so long as you are good and
kind. Farewell now and think sometimes of your sister, the Little Lame
Fox."
Janko wept at thought of parting with the Little Fox and the Little Fox
promised him that she would help him again if ever he needed her. Then
she turned and trotted off into the woods and Janko rode homewards
without her.
When he reached the crossroads where he had parted from his brothers
just one year before he came upon a crowd of angry farmers belaboring
two men who had been robbing their barns. Janko found that the two men
were his own brothers who since he had seen them had fallen into bad
company, lost all their money at cards, and had finally taken to
thieving. Janko paid the farmers for the damage his brothers had done
them and took his brothers home with him.
You can imagine the old farmer's happiness at seeing all three of his
sons after a whole year's absence. It was even greater than his delight
at getting back his Magic Grape-Vine. But that doesn't mean that he
wasn't delighted to have back the Grape-Vine. At the first cup of wine
that the Vine poured him, his left eye ceased weeping and it was never
known to weep again.
He was delighted, too, at having the Golden Maiden in the house and
pleased when people came from far and near to see the Maiden's Golden
Horse and Golden Apple-Tree and Golden Cradle. He even began to hope
that she might marry one of his sons before some prince came along and
snatched her away. He thought the Maiden would make a wonderful bride
for the oldest. Unfortunately Janko had not told him what reprobates the
two older sons were, and the older brothers themselves had given their
father to understand that it was really they who had found the Magic
Grape-Vine and rescued the Golden Maiden. You see instead of being
grateful to Janko for having saved their necks from the angry farmers,
they hated him worse than ever.
"That Booby!" the older brother growled. "Just because he took the
left-hand road and found the Magic Grape-Vine he thinks himself so much
better than us! It was just luck--that's all it was! Any one who took
the left-hand road could have found the old Grape-Vine!"
"And do you notice the way the Golden Maiden always smiles on him?" the
other said. "The first thing we know she'll be marrying him and giving
him the Golden Horse and the Golden Apple-Tree and the Golden Cradle!
Then where will we be?"
"Brother," whispered the first, "let us make away with him!"
So they plotted together and they asked Janko to go hunting with them
the next day. Suspecting nothing Janko went. When they came to a deep
well in the woods they asked Janko to reach them a cup of water. As he
stooped over into the well they pushed him all the way in and drowned
him. That's the kind of brothers they were! Then they went home and
pretended to be surprised that Janko hadn't come home before them.
He didn't come that night or the next day either, and the Golden Maiden
grew sad and quiet, the Magic Grape-Vine no longer poured out its
precious wine every hour, the Golden Apple-Tree stopped putting forth
its buds and blossoms and golden fruit, and the Golden Horse languished
and drooped its lovely head.
"Everything goes wrong when Janko isn't here!" the farmer said. "Where
can he be?"
On the third day the Golden Maiden suddenly began to laugh and sing, the
Magic Grape-Vine again poured forth a bucket of precious wine every
hour, the Golden Apple-Tree put out buds and blossoms and golden fruit,
and the Golden Horse lifted its beautiful head and neighed loud and
happily. And do you know why? Because the Little Lame Fox had just
rescued Janko and brought him back to life! She pulled him out of the
well, and rolled him about on the ground, and worked over him until all
the water was emptied from his lungs and he was able to breathe again.
Then as he opened his eyes the Little Fox said:
"I told you, brother, I'd come again if you needed my help. I was just
in time for a little longer and I could never have brought you back to
life. And now, brother, the enchantment that held me is broken and I
need no longer go about as a Little Lame Fox. My mother was a wicked
witch and she enchanted me because she was angry with me for saving a
man whom she wanted to kill. So she turned me into a little fox and she
said I should have to remain a fox forever unless I succeeded in
bringing back to life my benefactor. You are my benefactor, Janko, for
you shared your bread and cheese with me the first time we met, and now
I have been able to bring you back to life."
As she spoke she changed into a lovely maiden.
"Good-by, Janko," she said. "Go home now and tell your father how your
evil brothers have treated you. Unless you do this they will plot
against the Golden Maiden and you may not be able to protect her."
So Janko and the maiden kissed each other as a brother and sister might
and the maiden went her way and Janko returned to his father's house.
The Golden Maiden and the old farmer were not in the least surprised to
see him for things were so happy again that they just knew it must be
because Janko was coming back. But his two brothers when they caught
sight of him alive and well were so frightened that they took to their
heels and ran off as fast as they could go and what's more they've never
shown themselves since. And good riddance, too, I say, for they were
wicked evil fellows and would only have injured Janko further if they
When Janko told his father all the wicked things they had done, the old
farmer could scarcely believe his ears.
"And to think," he said, "I had been hoping the Golden Maiden would
marry one of them! Mercy me! Mercy me!"
"But, father," the Golden Maiden said--she called him father now and
it pleased him mightily; "father, I should rather marry Janko!"
"Marry Janko!" the farmer cried. "Why, my dear, Janko is a stupid lad,
not nearly so clever as his two brothers!"
"I don't care if he is stupid. He's got a good heart and that's more
than the other two have. And besides that he's got a brave heart for he
rescued me from the dark cavern and he faced the awful ghost that stood
over my Golden Cradle. Why, father, I'd rather marry Janko than any
prince in the world!"
You can imagine Janko's feelings when he heard this!
"I'd feel like a prince if you did marry me, dear Golden One!" he cried.
Well, she did marry him, and sure enough he did feel like a prince. What
prince, I'd like to know, had a lovelier bride? None! And was there any
prince in the world whose bride brought him greater riches than the
Golden Apple-Tree, the Golden Horse, and Golden Cradle? No, not one! And
furthermore the farmer promised that, when he died, he would leave him
the Magic Grape-Vine.
So Janko lived happy and prosperous. And it all came about through his
having a good honest heart.
THE ENCHANTED PEAFOWL
The Story of the Golden Apples, the Wicked Dragon, and the Magic
Horse
Have you ever heard the story of the Peafowl who became a Queen and of
the Tsar's Youngest Son who married her? Well, here it is:
There was once a Tsar who took great delight in his garden. Every
morning you could see him bending over his flowers or picking the fruit
of his favorite tree. This was an apple-tree that had the magic property
of bearing buds, blossoms, and golden fruit every twenty-four hours. It
was known as the golden apple-tree. In the morning the first thing when
he woke up the Tsar would look out his bedroom window to see that all
was well with his beloved tree.
One morning when as usual he looked out he was grieved to see that the
tree had been stripped of all the golden fruit which had ripened during
the night.
"Who has stolen my golden apples?" he cried.
The palace guards looked everywhere for some trace of the thief but
found nothing.
The next morning the same thing had happened and every morning
thereafter when the Tsar looked out of his bedroom window he saw that
the tree had again been stripped of its golden fruit.
He called his three sons to him and said:
"Is it seemly that a Tsar who has three able-bodied sons should be
robbed night after night of his golden apples? Are you willing that this
should happen and you do nothing about it?"
The eldest son who was a braggart said:
"My father, you need say no more. I myself will watch to-night and when
the thief appears I will overpower him and bring him to you."
So the eldest son watched that night, standing on guard under the
apple-tree and leaning against its trunk.
As midnight approached his eyes grew heavy and he fell asleep. While he
slept the golden apples ripened and were stolen and the next morning, as
usual, the branches were bare.
The second son who was a crafty youth laughed at his brother and said:
"To-night I will watch. I will pretend to be asleep and when the thief
appears I will jump upon him and overpower him."
So when night came the second son went on guard under the tree and in
order to deceive the thief he lay down on the ground and closed his
eyes. At first he stayed wide awake but as the hours dragged by he grew
tired and then, because he was in such a comfortable position, he too
fell soundly asleep. Midnight came and the apples ripened but the next
morning, when the second prince awoke, the tree had again been stripped
of its golden fruit.
The Tsar's Youngest Son now said:
"Father, let me go on guard to-night."
His brothers jeered and the Tsar shook his head.
"Nay, nay, my boy, why should you succeed where your older brothers have
failed? It is God's will that my golden apples should be stolen and I
must submit."
But the Youngest Son insisted that he, too, be given a chance to capture
the thief and at last the Tsar consented.
"I will sleep soundly the first part of the night," the Youngest Prince
thought to himself, "and with God's help wake up at midnight."
As soon as it was dark he had his bed carried outdoors and placed under
the apple-tree. Then after commending his undertaking to God he lay down
and fell soundly to sleep. Just before midnight he awoke. The apples
had ripened and were shining among the leaves like golden lanterns.
On the stroke of midnight there was a whirr of wings and nine beautiful
peafowl came flying down from the sky. Eight of them settled on the
branches of the apple-tree and began eating the golden fruit. The ninth
alighted beside the Young Prince and as she touched the ground changed
into a lovely maiden.
She was so beautiful and gentle that the Young Prince fell madly in love
with her and at once began wooing her with kisses and caresses. She
responded to his love and they spent the night together in great
At the first streak of dawn she jumped up, saying:
"My dear one, I must leave you now!"
"But you will come again, won't you?" the Prince asked.
"Yes," she promised him. "To-night."
Suddenly the Prince remembered the golden apples. The peafowl in the
tree were about to eat the last of them.
"Can't you make them leave just one apple for my father?" the Prince
begged.
The maiden spoke to the birds and they flew down with two of the golden
apples, one for the Tsar and one for the Prince himself.
Then the maiden lifted her arms above her head, changed into a peafowl,
and with the other eight flew off into the morning sky.
The Prince carried the two apples to his father and the Tsar was so
delighted that he forgot to ask the Prince the particulars of his
adventure.
The next night the Prince again slept under the apple-tree and awoke
just before midnight to hear the whirr of wings and see the nine peafowl
come flying down from the sky. Eight of them settled on the branches of
the apple-tree and the ninth, as before, alighted beside him and as she
touched the earth changed into the lovely maiden of his heart. Again
they passed the night together in great happiness and in the early dawn
before she flew away the maiden gave him the last two of the golden
apples.
This went on night after night until the Prince's two elder brothers
were mad with jealousy and consumed with curiosity to know what happened
every night under the apple-tree. At last they went to an evil old woman
and bribed her to spy on the Young Prince.
"Find out what happens every night at the apple-tree," they told her,
"and we will reward you richly."
So the evil old woman hid herself near the apple-tree and that night
when the prince fell asleep she crept under his bed. Midnight came and
she heard the whirr of wings and presently she saw the white feet of a
lovely maiden touch the ground and she heard the prince say: "My love,
is it you?"
Then as the Prince and the maiden began kissing each other and
exchanging vows of love very slowly and cautiously she reached up her
hand from under the bed and groped around until she felt the maiden's
hair. Then with a scissors she snipped off a lock.
"Oh!" the maiden cried in terror. She jumped up, lifted her arms above
her head, changed into a peafowl, and without another word flew off with
the other eight and vanished in the sky.
In a fury the Prince searched about to see what had frightened his loved
one. He found the old woman under the bed and dragging her out by the
hair he struck her dead with his sword. And good riddance it was, too,
for she was an evil old thing and only caused mischief in the world.
But putting the evil old woman out of the way did not, alas, bring back
the lovely maiden. The Prince waited for her the next night and the next
and many following nights but she nevermore returned.
The magic apple-tree of course was no longer robbed of its golden fruit,
so the Tsar was happy once again and never tired of praising the valor
of his youngest son. But as for the prince, in spite of his father's
praise he grew sadder and sadder.
Finally he went to the Tsar and said:
"Father, I have lost the maiden whom I love and life without her is not
worth the living. Unless I go out in the world and find her I shall
die."
The Tsar tried to dissuade him but when he could not he mounted him on a
fine horse, gave him a serving man to accompany him, and sent him off
with his blessing.
The Prince and his man wandered hither and thither over the world
inquiring everywhere for news of nine peafowl one of whom was a lovely
maiden. They came at last to a lake on the shore of which lived an ugly
old woman with an only daughter.
"Nine peafowl," she repeated, "and one of them a lovely maiden! You must
mean the nine sisters, the enchanted princesses, who fly about as
peafowl. They come here every morning to bathe in the lake. What can you
want with them?"
The Prince told the old woman that one of them was his love and that
unless he married her he would die.
"Die, indeed!" scoffed the old woman. "That's no way for a handsome
young man to talk! I'll tell you what you ought to do: give up thought
of this peafowl princess and marry my daughter. Then I'll make you heir
to all my riches."
She called out her daughter who was as ugly as herself and cross and
ill-natured in the bargain. Just one look at her and the Prince said
firmly:
"No! If I can't marry my own dear love I won't marry any one!"
"Very well!" said the old woman shortly.
When the Prince's back was turned she called the serving man aside and
whispered:
"Will you do what I tell you if I pay you well?"
The serving man who was a mean greedy fellow nodded his head and the old
woman handed him a small bellows.
"Hide this in your shirt," she told him, "and don't let your master see
it. Then to-morrow morning when you go down to the lake with him to see
the nine peafowl slip it out and blow it on the back of his neck. Do
this and I'll give you a golden ducat."
The serving man took the bellows and did as the old woman directed. The
next morning down at the lake just as the nine peafowl came flying into
sight he crept up behind the Prince and blew the bellows on the back of
his neck. Instantly sleep overcame the Prince. His eyes closed, his head
drooped, and the reins fell from his hands.
Eight of the peafowl alighted on the water's edge, changed into lovely
maidens and went bathing in the lake, but the ninth flew straight down
to the Prince, fluttered her wings in his face and uttering sad cries
tried hard to arouse him.
The eight finished their baths, changed back into birds, and calling
their sister they all flew off together. Then and not till then did the
Prince awaken.
"Ah!" he cried, "how could I have fallen asleep just when the peafowl
appeared? Where are they now? Are they gone?"
"Yes," his man told him, "they're gone. Eight of them changed into
lovely maidens and went bathing in the lake but the ninth fluttered
about your head and tried in every way to arouse you. I tried to arouse
you, too, but you kept on sleeping."
"Strange!" thought the Prince. "How could I have fallen asleep at such a
time? I'll have to try again to-morrow morning."
The next morning the same thing happened. The treacherous serving man
again blew the bellows on the back of the Prince's neck and instantly
the Prince sank into a deep sleep from which the ninth peafowl was
unable to arouse him.
As she rose to join her sisters she said to the serving man:
"When your master awakens tell him that to-morrow is the last day we
shall come here to bathe in the lake."
The peafowl were no sooner gone than the Prince rubbed his eyes and
looked about.
"What! Where are they? Have I been asleep again?"
The serving man pretended to be deeply grieved.
"I tried hard to awaken you, master, but I couldn't. The ninth peafowl
as she flew away said to tell you that to-morrow is the last day they'll
come to the lake."
The next day as the Prince waited for the appearance of the nine peafowl
he galloped madly along the shore of the lake hoping in this way to ward
off the strange sleep. But the moment the nine peafowl appeared in the
sky he was so delighted that he drew rein and the treacherous serving
man was able to slip up behind him and blow the magic bellows on his
neck. So again he slept soundly while the ninth peafowl fluttered about
his head and tried vainly to arouse him.
As she was flying away she said to the serving man:
"Tell your master that now he will never find me unless he strikes off
the head from the nail."
When the Prince awoke the serving man delivered this message.
"What can she mean?" the Prince said.
He looked hard at the serving man and something in the fellow's
appearance made him suspect treachery.
"You know more than you're telling me!" the Prince cried, and taking the
cowardly fellow by the throat he shook him and choked him until he had
got the truth out of him.
"Ha!" cried the Prince. "Now I understand! You are the nail of which my
dear love warns me!"
The fellow whined and begged for mercy but the Prince with one blow of
his sword struck off his head. Then, leaving the body where it fell for
the old woman to bury, he mounted his horse and again set forth on his
quest.
Everywhere he went he made inquiries about the nine enchanted peafowl
and everywhere people shook their heads and said they had never heard of
them. At last high up in a wild mountain he found an old hermit who
knew all about them.
"Ah," he said, "you mean the nine princesses. Eight of them have broken
the enchantment that held them and are now happily married. The ninth
awaits you. She is living in the royal palace of a beautiful city that
lies three days' journey to the north of this mountain. When you find
her, if you do just as she says she, too, will soon be free of all
enchantment. Then she will be made queen."
The Prince thanked the hermit and rode on. After three days he came to
the city of which the hermit had told him. He made his way to the palace
and into the Princess's presence. Sure enough the Princess was his own
dear love. She received him with joy, promised soon to marry him, and
gave over to him the keys of the palace.
"You shall now be master here," she told him, "to go where you like and
do as you like. There is only one thing that you must not do, only one
place where you must not go. Under the palace are twelve cellars. Here
are the keys to them all. Go into eleven of them whenever you will but
you must never open the door of the twelfth one. If you do a heavy
misfortune may fall upon both of us."
One day while the Princess was walking in the garden, the young Prince
thought he would go through the cellars. So, taking the keys, he
unlocked the cellars one after another until he had seen eleven of them.
Then he stood before the door of the twelfth wondering why the Princess
had warned him not to open it.
"I'll open it just a little," he thought to himself. "If there's
something inside that tries to get out, I'll close it quickly."
So he took the twelfth key, unlocked the twelfth door, and peeped inside
the twelfth cellar. It was empty except for one huge cask with an open
bunghole.
"I don't see anything in here to be afraid of," he said.
Just then he heard a groan from inside the cask and a voice called out
in a begging, whining tone:
"A cup of water, brother! A cup of water! I am dying of thirst!"
Now the Prince thought to himself that it was a terrible thing for any
living creature to be dying of thirst. So he hurried out, got a cup of
water, and poured it into the open bunghole. Instantly one of the three
iron hoops that bound the cask burst asunder and the voice inside the
cask said:
"Thank you, brother! Thank you! Now give me another cup! I am dying of
thirst!"
So the Prince poured in a second cup and the second iron hoop snapped
apart and when the voice still begged for more water he poured in a
third cup. The third hoop broke, the staves of the cask fell in, and a
horrid dragon sprang out. Before the Prince could move, he had flown
through the door of the twelfth cellar into the eleventh cellar, then
into the tenth cellar, the ninth cellar, the eight cellar, the seventh
cellar, the sixth, the fifth, the fourth, the third, the second, the
first, and so out into the garden. The Prince reached the garden just in
time to see the monster overpower the Princess.
"Alas, my dear one, what have you done?" cried the poor Princess as the
dragon carried her off. "The enchantment would soon have been broken and
I could have married you if only you had not gone into the twelfth
cellar!"
Heartbroken at what had happened, the Prince mounted his horse and
started off in pursuit of the dragon.
"I must do what I can to rescue my loved one," he said, "even if it
costs me my life."
He rode many days until he came to the castle of the dragon. The dragon
was out and the Princess received him with tears of joy.
"Come," he said to her, "let us escape before the dragon returns."
The Princess sighed and shook her head.
"How, my loved one, can we escape? The dragon rides a magic horse and
however fast we go he will be able to overtake us."
But the Prince insisted that they make the attempt. So she mounted with
him and off they went.
When the dragon arrived home and found her gone, he laughed a brutal
laugh and said to his horse:
"I suppose that foolish young Prince has been here and is trying to
carry her off. Shall we start after them now or wait till we've had our
supper?"
"We might as well eat," the horse said, "for we'll overtake them
anyway."
So they both ate and then the dragon mounted the magic horse and in no
time at all they had overtaken the fugitives.
"I ought to tear you to pieces," the dragon said to the Prince, "but I
won't this time because you gave me a cup of water. However, I warn you
not to try this foolishness again!"
With that he clutched the poor weeping Princess in his scaly arms and
carried her back to the castle.
What was the Prince to do now? He tried to plan some other way of
rescuing the Princess but he could think of none. In spite of the
dragon's threat he went back the next day and tried the same thing
again. Again the dragon overtook him and snatched back the Princess.
"I have spared you one time," he said to the Prince, "and I will spare
you this one time more for the sake of the water you gave me. But I warn
you if you come again I will tear you to pieces."
But what man worthy the name will accept such a warning when the safety
and happiness of his loved one is concerned? The next day while the
dragon was out the Prince again returned to the castle.
"It is plain," he said to the Princess, "that we can never escape until
we, too, get a magic horse. We must find out where the dragon got his.
To-night when he comes home, speak him fair and caress his head and when
he is in fine humor ask him about his horse--what kind of a horse it is
and where he got it. Then I will come back to-morrow at this same hour
and you can tell me."
So that night when the dragon came home the Princess allowed him to put
his head in her lap and she scratched him softly behind the ears and
petted him until he was purring like a giant cat.
"Urrh! Urrh! Urrh!" purred the dragon. "How happy we are here, just you
and I! What a foolish young man that Prince of yours is to think I'd let
him carry you off! Urrh! Urrh! Urrh!"
"Yes," the Princess agreed, "he is foolish or he would never suppose his
horse could outrace yours."
"Urrh! Urrh!" the dragon purred. "You're right! He seems to think my
horse is an ordinary horse. Why, I got my horse from the Old Woman of
the Mountain and the only other horse in the world that can outstrip him
is another horse that the Old Woman still has. The Prince would have a
hard time getting him!"
The Princess still scratching the dragon behind his ears, just where he
loved it most, asked softly:
"Why?"
"Urrh! Urrh! Urrh! Because the Old Woman will never give that horse away
until a man comes along who is able to guard for three nights in
succession the Old Woman's mare and foal. Any one who attempts this and
fails she kills. But even if a man were to succeed he would never get
the right horse for the old witch would palm off another on him. Urrh!
Urrh! Urrh! Oh, that feels good, my dear!"
"How would she do that?" the Princess asked.
"Urrh! Urrh! Urrh! You see she says to every man who undertakes to guard
the mare: 'If you succeed you may have any horse in my stable.' Then she
shows him twelve beautiful stallions with shiny coats, but she doesn't
show him a scrawny miserable looking beast that lies neglected on the
dung heap. Yet this is the magic horse and brother to mine."
Now the Princess knew all she needed to know and the next day when the
Prince came she told him what the dragon had said. So the Prince at once
set out to find the Old Woman of the Mountain.
He traveled three days over waste places and through strange lands. On
the first day as he was riding along the shores of a lake he heard a
little voice crying out:
"Help me, brother, help me and--who knows?--some day I may help you!"
The Prince looked down and saw a fish that was floundering on the sand.
He dismounted to get the fish and throw it back into the water.
"Take one of my scales," the fish said. "Then if ever you need my help
just rub the scale."
So the Prince, before he threw the fish into the lake, scraped off a
scale and tied it in a corner of his handkerchief. Then he rode on.
The second day a fox that had been caught in a trap called out to him:
The Prince opened the trap and the fox, before it limped away, gave the
Prince one of its hairs and said:
"If ever you need me, rub this hair."
The third day he met a raven that had fallen on a thorn and was pinned
to the ground.
"Help me, brother, help me!" the raven begged, "and--who knows?--some
day I may help you!"
The Prince lifted the raven off the thorn and the raven, before it flew
away, gave the Prince one of its feathers saying:
"If ever you need me, rub this feather."
So the Prince reached the house of the Old Woman of the Mountain with
the fish's scale, the fox's hair, and the raven's feather each safely
tied in a corner of his handkerchief.
The Old Woman of the Mountain was an ugly old witch with a long nose
that hooked down and a long chin that hooked up.
"Ha! Ha!" she cackled when she saw the Prince. "Another one that wants
service with the Old Woman, eh?"
"Yes," said the Prince.
"You know the conditions?" the Old Woman said. "Guard my mare and her
foal for three nights in succession and you may have any horse in my
stable. But if she escapes you, then your head is mine and I'll stick it
up there as a warning to other rash young men."
The Old Woman pointed to a high picket fence that surrounded the
courtyard. On every picket but one there was a grinning human skull. The
Prince looked and the only picket that had no skull called out:
"I want my skull, granny! I want my skull!"
The Old Woman gave a wicked laugh.
"You see," she said, "we were expecting you!"
When night fell the Prince led out the mare and her foal to a grassy
meadow. To make sure that she would not escape him, he mounted her.
Midnight came and he must have fallen asleep for suddenly he awoke to
find himself astride a rail with an empty bridle in his hand. In despair
he looked in all directions. At one end of the meadow was a pond.
"She may have gone there to drink," he said to himself.
At the pond he saw a hoofprint.
[Illustration: The Old Woman of the Mountain and the Wonder Horse]
"Ah," he thought, "if my fish were here, it could tell me."
He untied the corner of the handkerchief that had the fish scale, rubbed
the scale gently, and at once a little voice called out from the water:
"What is it, brother? Can I help you?"
"Can you tell me what has become of the Old Woman's mare and foal?"
"Aye, brother, that I can! She and the foal are turned into fish and are
down here in the water hiding amongst us. Strike the water three times
with the bridle and say: 'Mare of the Old Woman, come out!' That will
bring her!"
The Prince did this. There was a commotion in the water, a big fish and
a little fish leaped high in the air, fell on shore, and instantly
changed to mare and foal. When morning came the Prince drove them back
to the Old Woman.
She grinned and pretended to be pleased but, when she had the mare alone
in the stable, the Prince heard her beating the poor creature and
"Why didn't you do as I told you and hide among the fishes?"
"I did," whinnied the mare, "but the fishes are his friends and he found
"To-night," the Old Woman snarled, "hide among the foxes and this time
don't let him find you! Do you hear me? The foxes!"
The Prince remembered this and the second night when he awoke to find
himself again sitting astride a rail and holding an empty bridle in his
hand, he untied the second corner of his handkerchief, took out the
fox's hair, and rubbed it gently.
Instantly he heard a little bark and the fox's voice said:
"Can you tell me," the Prince asked, "what has become of the Old Woman's
mare and foal?"
"Aye, brother, that I can! She and the foal are turned into foxes and
are over in yonder woods now hiding among my people. Strike the earth
three times with the bridle and say: 'Mare of the Old Woman, come back!'
That will bring her!"
The Prince did this and instantly two foxes, a vixen and a cub, came
trotting out of the woods and when they reached the Prince they changed
back to mare and foal.
In the morning the Prince drove them home to the Old Woman. As before
she grinned and pretended to be pleased but when she had the mare alone
in the stable the Prince heard her giving the poor creature another
beating and saying:
"Why didn't you do as I told you and hide among the foxes?"
"I did," whinnied the mare, "but the foxes are his friends, too, and he
found me!"
"To-night," the Old Woman ordered, "hide among the ravens and this time
don't let him find you!"
The third night the Prince tried hard to stay awake but sleep again
overcame him and when he woke he found himself for the third time
sitting astride a rail and holding the empty bridle in his hand. But he
remembered the Old Woman's words and at once opened the third corner of
his handkerchief and taking out the raven's feather rubbed it gently.
There was a flutter of wings and a raven's hoarse voice said:
"Caw! Caw! What is it, brother? Can I help you?"
"Aye, brother, that I can! She and the foal are turned into ravens and
are perched in yonder tall fir tree hiding among my folk. Strike the
trunk of the tree three times with your bridle and say: 'Mare of the
Old Woman, come down!' That will bring her!"
The Prince went over to the fir tree, struck it three times with the
bridle and said:
"Mare of the Old Woman, come down!"
Instantly two ravens, a big one and a fledgling, fluttered to earth and
changed to mare and foal. So when morning came the Prince was able to
drive them back to the Old Woman and claim his reward.
The Old Woman was angry enough to kill him but she pretended to be
pleased and she smiled and grinned and she patted the Prince on the arm
"Aye, my son, but you are a hero! You have won the reward and you are
worthy of it. Choose now the finest horse in my stable. It is yours."
She drove the twelve handsome stallions out into the courtyard and urged
them on the Prince one after the other. But at each the Prince shook his
"I am only a poor adventurer," he said. "Such horses as these are too
fine for me. Give me rather that poor mangy creature that lies over
yonder on the dung heap. That is the one I choose."
Then the Old Woman fell into an awful rage and shook and chattered and
begged the Prince not to take that horse.
"It would shame me," she said, "to have you ride off on that poor beast
which is half dead already! No, no, my son, you mustn't take him!"
"But that's the one I'm going to take," the Prince said firmly, "that
and none other!" He drew his sword and lifted it threateningly. "I have
won whatever horse I choose and now, Old Woman, if you do not keep your
bargain I shall strike you dead with this sword and stick up your
grinning skull on that empty picket!"
At that the empty picket began to shout:
"I want my skull! I want my skull!"
When the Old Woman of the Mountain saw that the Prince knew what he was
about, she gave up trying to deceive him and let him lead off the horse
he wanted. So the Prince walked away dragging the poor mangy creature
after him. When he was out of sight of the Old Woman's house, he turned
to the horse and began rubbing down his rough coat and patting his
wobbly legs.
"Now, my beauty," he said, "we'll see what you're made of!"
Under his hand the mangy beast changed to a glorious animal--one of
those wonder horses of the olden days that rise on the wind and gallop
with the clouds. Soon his coat shone like burnished gold and his tail
and mane streamed out like flames of fire.
"Ah, my master," the horse said, "I have been waiting for you this many
a day! We shall have glorious adventures together!"
Then the Prince mounted him and he rose on the wind and went so swiftly
that he covered in three minutes all the distance that it had taken the
Prince three days to go on an ordinary horse. Whiff! and there they were
at the dragon's castle and there was the Princess running out to welcome
"Now, my dear one," the Prince said, lifting the Princess up in front of
him, "this time the dragon will not overtake us!"
The wonder horse rose on the wind and off they went.
When the dragon got home and found that the Princess had fled again, he
said to his horse:
"Shall we follow her at once or shall we eat supper first?"
"It's all one what we do," the horse said, "for we shall never overtake
At that the dragon leaped upon his horse and, mounting on the wind,
started off in hot pursuit. Presently they caught sight of the other
horse carrying the Prince and the Princess but, try as he would, the
dragon's horse could not overtake the other. The dragon beat his horse
unmercifully and dug his sharp claws into the horse's tender flanks
until the horse in agony called out to the Prince's horse:
"Hold, brother, hold! Let me overtake you or this monster will kill me
with his cruelty!"
"Why do you carry such a monster?" the Prince's horse called back.
"Throw him from you and be rid of him forever!"
At that the dragon's horse reared suddenly and the dragon, losing his
balance, fell and was dashed to pieces on the rocks below.
And that was the end of that dragon!
Then the Princess wept but her tears were tears of joy for she knew now
that the enchantment that had bound her was broken forever. Never again
would she be changed into a peafowl at the whim of a wicked dragon,
never again be separated from her loved one. Presently she mounted the
dragon's horse and together she and the Prince returned to the beautiful
city. The people came out to meet them and when they heard of the
dragon's death a holiday was proclaimed and amidst music and dancing and
merrymaking the Princess married the Prince. Then she was made Queen of
that beautiful city and the Prince was made King. They ruled long and
wisely and better than that they lived happily for they loved each
So now you know the story of the Peafowl who became a Queen and of the
Tsar's Youngest Son who married her.
THE DRAGON'S STRENGTH
The Story of the Youngest Prince Who Killed the Sparrow
There was once a King who had three sons. One day the oldest son went
hunting and when night fell his huntsmen came riding home without him.
"Where is the prince?" the King asked.
"Isn't he here?" the huntsmen said. "He left us in midafternoon chasing
a hare near the Old Mill up the river. We haven't seen him since and we
supposed he must have come home alone."
When he hadn't returned the following day his brother, the second
prince, went out to search for him.
"I'll go to the Old Mill," he said to the King, "and see what's become
of him."
So he mounted his horse and rode up the river. As he neared the Old Mill
a hare crossed his path and the second prince being a hunter like his
brother at once gave chase. His attendant waited for his return but
waited in vain. Night fell and still there was no sign of the second
prince.
The attendant returned to the palace and told the King what had
happened. The King was surprised but not unduly alarmed and the
following day when the Youngest Prince asked to go hunting alone the
King suggested that he go in the direction of the Old Mill to find out
if he could what was keeping his brothers.
The Youngest Prince who had listened carefully to what his brothers'
attendants had reported decided to act cautiously. So when a hare
crossed his path as he approached the Old Mill, instead of giving it
chase, he rode off as though he were hunting other game. Later he
returned to the Old Mill from another direction.
He found an old woman sitting in front of it.
"Good evening, granny," he said in a friendly tone, pulling up his horse
for a moment's chat. "Do you live here? You know I thought the Old Mill
was deserted."
The old woman looked at him and shook her head gloomily.
"Deserted indeed! My boy, take an old woman's advice and don't have
anything to do with this old mill! It's an evil place!"
"Why, granny," the Prince said, "what's the matter with it?"
The old woman peered cautiously around and when she saw they were alone
she beckoned the Prince to come near. Then she whispered:
"A dragon lives here! A horrible monster! He takes the form of a hare
and lures people into the mill. Then he captures them. Some of them he
kills and eats and others he holds as prisoners in an underground
dungeon. I'm one of his prisoners and he keeps me here to work for him."
"Granny," the Youngest Prince said, "would you like me to rescue you?"
"My boy, you couldn't do it! You have no idea what a strong evil monster
the dragon is."
"If you found out something for me, granny, I think I might be able to
overcome the dragon and rescue you."
The old woman was doubtful but she promised to do anything the Youngest
Prince asked.
"Well then, granny, find out from the dragon where his strength is,
whether in his own body or somewhere else. Find out to-night and I'll
come back to-morrow at this same hour to see you."
So that night when the dragon came home, after he had supped and when
she was scratching his head to make him drowsy for bed, the old woman
said to him:
"Master, I think you're the strongest dragon in the world! Tell me now,
where does your strength lie--in your own beautiful body or somewhere
else?"
"You're right, old woman," the dragon grunted: "I am pretty strong as
dragons go. But I don't keep my strength in my own body. No, indeed!
That would be too dangerous. I keep it in the hearth yonder."
At that the old woman ran over to the hearth and, stooping down, she
kissed it and caressed it.
"O beautiful hearth!" she said, "where my master's strength is hidden!
How happy are the ashes that cover your stones!"
The dragon laughed with amusement.
"That's the time I fooled you, old woman! My strength isn't in the
hearth at all! It's in the tree in front of the mill."
The old woman at once ran out of the mill and threw her arms about the
tree.
"O tree!" she cried, "most beautiful tree in the world, guard carefully
our master's strength and let no harm come to it!"
Again the dragon laughed.
"I've fooled you another time, old woman! Come here and scratch my head
some more and this time I'll tell you the truth for I see you really
love your master."
So the old woman went back and scratched the dragon's head and the
dragon told her the truth about his strength.
"I keep it far away," he said. "In the third kingdom from here near the
Tsar's own city there is a deep lake. A dragon lives at the bottom of
the lake. In the dragon there is a wild boar; in the boar a hare; in the
hare a pigeon; in the pigeon a sparrow. My strength is in the sparrow.
Let any one kill the sparrow and I should die that instant. But I am
safe. No one but shepherds ever come to the lake and even they don't
come any more for the dragon has eaten up so many of them that the lake
has got a bad name. Indeed, nowadays even the Tsar himself is hard put
to it to find a shepherd. Oh, I tell you, old woman, your master is a
clever one!"
So now the old woman had the dragon's secret and the next day she told
it to the Youngest Prince. He at once devised a plan whereby he hoped to
overcome the dragon. He dressed himself as a shepherd and with crook in
hand started off on foot for the third kingdom. He traveled through
villages and towns, across rivers and over mountains, and reached at
last the third kingdom and the Tsar's own city. He presented himself at
the palace and asked employment as a shepherd.
The guards looked at him in surprise and said:
"A shepherd! Are you sure you want to be a shepherd?"
Then they called to their companions: "Here's a youth who wants to be a
shepherd!" And the word went through the palace and even the Tsar heard
"Send the youth to me," he ordered.
"Do you really want to be my shepherd?" he asked the Youngest Prince.
The Youngest Prince said yes, he did.
"If I put you in charge of the sheep, where would you pasture them?"
"Isn't there a lake beyond the city," the Prince asked, "where the
grazing is good?"
"H'm!" said the Tsar. "So you know about that lake, too! What else do
you know?"
"I've heard the shepherds disappear."
"And still you want to try your luck?" the Tsar exclaimed.
Just then the Tsar's only daughter, a lovely Princess, who had been
looking at the young stranger, slipped over to her father and whispered:
"But, father, you can't let such a handsome young man as that go off
with the sheep! It would be dreadful if he never returned!"
The Tsar whispered back:
"Hush, child! Your concern for the young man's safety does credit to
your noble feelings. But this is not the time or the place for
sentiment. We must consider first the welfare of the royal sheep."
He turned to the Youngest Prince:
"Very well, young man, you may consider yourself engaged as shepherd.
Provide yourself with whatever you need and assume your duties at once."
"There is one thing," the Youngest Prince said; "when I start out
to-morrow morning with the sheep I should like to take with me two
strong boarhounds, a falcon, and a set of bagpipes."
"You shall have them all," the Tsar promised.
Early the next morning when the Princess peeped out of her bedroom
window she saw the new shepherd driving the royal flocks to pasture. A
falcon was perched on his shoulder; he had a set of bagpipes under his
arm; and he was leading two powerful boarhounds on a leash.
"It's a shame!" the Princess said to herself. "He'll probably never
return and he's such a handsome young man, too!" And she was so unhappy
at thought of never again seeing the new shepherd that she couldn't go
back to sleep.
Well, the Youngest Prince reached the lake and turned out his sheep to
graze. He perched the falcon on a log, tied the dogs beside it, and laid
his bagpipes on the ground. Then he took off his smock, rolled up his
hose, and wading boldly into the lake called out in a loud voice:
"Ho, dragon, come out and we'll try a wrestling match! That is, if
you're not afraid!"
"Afraid?" bellowed an awful voice. "Who's afraid?"
The water of the lake churned this way and that and a horrible scaly
monster came to the surface. He crawled out on shore and clutched the
Prince around the waist. And the Prince clutched him in a grip just as
strong and there they swayed back and forth, and rolled over, and
wrestled together on the shore of the lake without either getting the
better of the other. By midafternoon when the sun was hot, the dragon
grew faint and cried out:
"Oh, if I could but dip my burning head in the cool water, then I could
toss you as high as the sky!"
"Don't talk nonsense!" the Prince said. "If the Tsar's daughter would
kiss my forehead, then I could toss you twice as high!"
After that the dragon slipped out of the Prince's grasp, plunged into
the water, and disappeared. The Prince waited for him but he didn't show
his scaly head again that day.
When evening came, the Prince washed off the grime of the fight, dressed
himself carefully, and then looking as fresh and handsome as ever drove
home his sheep. With the falcon on his shoulder and the two hounds at
his heels he came playing a merry tune on his bagpipes.
The townspeople hearing the bagpipes ran out of their houses and cried
to each other:
"The shepherd's come back!"
The Princess ran to her window and, when she saw the shepherd alive and
well, she put her hand to her heart and said:
"Oh!"
Even the Tsar was pleased.
"I'm not a bit surprised that he's back!" he said. "There's something
about this youth that I like!"
The next day the Tsar sent two of his trusted servants to the lake to
see what was happening there. They hid themselves behind some bushes on
a little hill that commanded the lake. They were there when the shepherd
arrived and they watched him as he waded out into the water and
challenged the dragon as on the day before.
They heard the shepherd call out in a loud voice:
And from the water they heard an awful voice bellow back:
"Afraid? Who's afraid?"
Then they saw the water of the lake churn this way and that and a
horrible scaly monster come to the surface. They saw him crawl out on
shore and clutch the shepherd around the waist. And they saw the
shepherd clutch him in a grip just as strong. And they watched the two
as they swayed back and forth and rolled over and wrestled together
without either getting the better of the other. By midafternoon when the
sun grew hot they saw the dragon grow faint and they heard him cry out:
"Oh, if I could only dip my burning head in the cool water, then I could
And they heard the shepherd reply:
"Don't talk nonsense! If the Tsar's daughter would kiss my forehead,
then I could toss you twice as high!"
Then they saw the dragon slip out of the shepherd's grasp, plunge into
the water, and disappear. They waited but he didn't show his scaly head
again that day.
So the Tsar's servants hurried home before the shepherd and told the
Tsar all they had seen and heard. The Tsar was mightily impressed with
the bravery of the shepherd and he declared that if he killed that
horrid dragon he should have the Princess herself for wife!
He sent for his daughter and told her all that his servants had reported
and he said to her:
"My daughter, you, too, can help rid your country of this monster if you
go out with the shepherd to-morrow and when the time comes kiss him on
the forehead. You will do this, will you not, for your country's sake?"
The Princess blushed and trembled and the Tsar, looking at her in
surprise, said:
"What! Shall a humble shepherd face a dragon unafraid and the daughter
of the Tsar tremble!"
"Father," the Princess cried, "it isn't the dragon that I'm afraid of!"
"What then?" the Tsar asked.
But what it was she was afraid of the Princess would not confess.
Instead she said:
"If the welfare of my country require that I kiss the shepherd on the
forehead, I shall do so."
So the next morning when the shepherd started out with his sheep, the
falcon on his shoulder, the dogs at his heels, the bagpipes under his
arm, the Princess walked beside him.
Her eyes were downcast and he saw that she was trembling.
"Do not be afraid, dear Princess," he said to her. "Nothing shall harm
you--I promise that!"
"I'm not afraid," the Princess murmured. But she continued to blush and
tremble and, although the shepherd tried to look into her eyes to
reassure her, she kept her head averted.
This time the Tsar himself and many of his courtiers had gone on before
and taken their stand on the hill that overlooked the lake to see the
final combat of the shepherd and the dragon.
When the shepherd and the Princess reached the lake, the shepherd put
his falcon on the log as before and tied the dogs beside it and laid his
bagpipes on the ground. Then he threw off his smock, rolled up his hose,
and wading boldly into the lake called out in a loud voice:
[Illustration: Next Morning the Princess Peeped Out and Saw the
Shepherd]
The water of the lake churned this way and that and the horrible scaly
monster came to the surface. He crawled to shore and clutched the
shepherd around the waist. The shepherd clutched him in a grip just
as strong and there they swayed back and forth and rolled over and
better of the other. The Princess without the least show of fear stood
nearby calling out encouragement to the shepherd and waiting for the
moment when the shepherd should need her help.
By midafternoon when the sun was hot, the dragon grew faint and cried
"Don't talk nonsense!" the shepherd said. "If the Tsar's daughter would
kiss my forehead then I could toss you twice as high!"
Instantly the Princess ran forward and kissed the shepherd three times.
The first kiss fell on his forehead, the second on his nose, the third
on his mouth. With each kiss his strength increased an hundredfold and
taking the dragon in a mighty grip he tossed him up so high that for a
moment the Tsar and all the courtiers lost sight of him in the sky. Then
he fell to earth with such a thud that he burst.
Out of his body sprang a wild boar. The shepherd was ready for this and
on the moment he unleashed the two hounds and they fell on the boar and
tore him to pieces.
Out of the boar jumped a rabbit. It went leaping across the meadow but
the dogs caught it and killed it.
Out of the rabbit flew a pigeon. Instantly the shepherd unloosed the
falcon. It rose high in the air, then swooped down upon the pigeon,
clutched it in its talons, and delivered it into the shepherd's hands.
He cut open the pigeon and found the sparrow.
"Spare me! Spare me!" squawked the sparrow.
"Tell me where my brothers are," the shepherd demanded with his fingers
about the sparrow's throat.
"Your brothers? They are alive and in the deep dungeon that lies below
the Old Mill. Behind the mill there are three willow saplings growing
from one old root. Cut the saplings and strike the root. A heavy iron
door leading down into the dungeon will open. In the dungeon you will
find many captives old and young, your brothers among them. Now that I
have told you this are you going to spare my life?"
But the shepherd wrung the sparrow's neck for he knew that only in that
way could the monster who had captured his brothers be killed.
Well, now that the dragon was dead the Tsar and all his courtiers came
down from the hill and embraced the shepherd and told him what a brave
youth he was.
"You have delivered us all from a horrid monster," the Tsar said, "and
to show you my gratitude and the country's gratitude I offer you my
daughter for wife."
"Thank you," said the shepherd, "but I couldn't think of marrying the
Princess unless she is willing to marry me."
The Princess blushed and trembled just as she had blushed and trembled
the night before and that morning, too, on the way to the lake. She
tried to speak but could not at first. Then in a very little voice she
"As a Princess I think it is my duty to marry this brave shepherd who
has delivered my country from this terrible dragon, and--and I think I
should want to marry him anyway."
She said the last part of her speech in such a very low voice that only
the shepherd himself heard it. But that was right enough because after
all it was intended only for him.
So then and there beside the lake before even the shepherd had time to
wash his face and hands and put on his smock the Tsar put the Princess's
hand in his hand and pronounced them betrothed.
After that the shepherd bathed in the lake and then refreshed and clean
he sounded his bagpipes and he and the Princess and the Tsar and all the
courtiers returned to the city driving the sheep before them.
All the townspeople came out to meet them and they danced to the music
of the bagpipes and there was great rejoicing both over the death of the
dragon and over the betrothal of the Princess and the brave shepherd.
The wedding took place at once and the wedding festivities lasted a
week. Such feasting as the townspeople had! Such music and dancing!
When the wedding festivities were ended, the shepherd told the Tsar who
he really was.
"You say you're a Prince!" the Tsar cried, perfectly delighted at this
news. Then he declared he wasn't in the least surprised. In fact, he
said, he had suspected as much from the first!
"Do you think it likely," he asked somewhat pompously, "that any
daughter of mine would fall in love with a man who wasn't a prince?"
"I think I'd have fallen in love with you whatever you were!" whispered
the Princess to her young husband. But she didn't let her father hear
her!
The Prince told the Tsar about his brothers' captivity and how he must
go home to release them, and the Tsar at once said that he and his
bride might go provided they returned as soon as possible.
They agreed to this and the Tsar fitted out a splendid escort for them
and sent them away with his blessing.
So the Prince now traveled back through the towns and villages of three
kingdoms, across rivers and over mountains, no longer a humble shepherd
on foot, but a rich and mighty personage riding in a manner that
befitted his rank.
When he reached the deserted mill, his friend the old woman was waiting
"I know, my Prince, you have succeeded for the monster has disappeared."
"Yes, granny, you are right: I have succeeded. I found the dragon in the
lake, and the boar in the dragon, and the rabbit in the boar, and the
pigeon in the rabbit, and the sparrow in the pigeon. I took the sparrow
and killed it. So you are free now, granny, to return to your home. And
soon all those other poor captives will be free."
He went behind the mill and found the three willow saplings. He cut them
off and struck the old root. Sure enough a heavy iron door opened. This
led down into a deep dungeon which was crowded with unfortunate
prisoners. The Prince led them all out and sent them their various ways.
He found his own two brothers among them and led them home to his
father.
There was great rejoicing in the King's house, and in the King's heart,
too, for he had given up hope of ever seeing any of his sons again.
The King was so charmed with the Princess that he said it was a pity
that she couldn't marry his oldest son so that she might one day be
Queen.
"The Youngest Prince is a capable young man," the King said, "and
there's no denying that he managed this business of killing the dragon
very neatly. But he is after all only the Youngest Prince with very
little hope of succeeding to the kingdom. If you hadn't married him in
such haste one of his older brothers might easily have fallen in love
with you."
"I don't regret my haste," the Princess said. "Besides he is now my
father's heir. But that doesn't matter for I should be happy with the
Youngest Prince if he were only a shepherd."
THE LITTLE SINGING FROG
The Story of a Girl Whose Parents Were Ashamed of Her
There was once a poor laborer and his wife who had no children. Every
day the woman would sigh and say:
"If only we had a child!"
Then the man would sigh, too, and say:
"It would be pleasant to have a little daughter, wouldn't it?"
At last they went on a pilgrimage to a holy shrine and there they prayed
God to give them a child.
"Any kind of a child!" the woman prayed. "I'd be thankful for a child of
our own even if it were a frog!"
God heard their prayer and sent them a little daughter--not a little
girl daughter, however, but a little frog daughter. They loved their
little frog child dearly and played with her and laughed and clapped
their hands as they watched her hopping about the house. But when the
neighbors came in and whispered: "Why, that child of theirs is nothing
but a frog!" they were ashamed and they decided that when people were
about they had better keep their child hidden in a closet.
So the frog girl grew up without playmates of her own age, seeing only
her father and mother. She used to play about her father as he worked.
He was a vine-dresser in a big vineyard and of course it was great fun
for the little frog girl to hop about among the vines.
Every day at noontime the woman used to come to the vineyard carrying
her husband's dinner in a basket. The years went by and she grew old and
feeble and the daily trip to the vineyard began to tire her and the
basket seemed to her to grow heavier and heavier.
"Let me help you, mother," the frog daughter said. "Let me carry
father's dinner to him and you sit home and rest."
So from that time on the frog girl instead of the old woman carried the
dinner basket to the vineyard. While the old man ate, the frog girl
would hop up into the branches of a tree and sing. She sang very sweetly
and her old father, when he petted her, used to call her his Little
Singing Frog.
Now one day while she was singing the Tsar's Youngest Son rode by and
heard her. He stopped his horse and looked this way and that but for the
life of him he couldn't see who it was who was singing so sweetly.
"Who is singing?" he asked the old man.
But the old man who, as I told you before, was ashamed of his frog
daughter before strangers, at first pretended not to hear and then, when
the young Prince repeated his question, answered gruffly:
"There's no one singing!"
But the next day at the same hour when the Prince was again riding by he
heard the same sweet voice and he stopped again and listened.
"Surely, old man," he said, "there is some one singing! It is a lovely
girl, I know it is! Why, if I could find her, I'd be willing to marry
her at once and take her home to my father, the Tsar!"
"Don't be rash, young man," the laborer said.
"I mean what I say!" the Prince declared. "I'd marry her in a minute!"
"Are you sure you would?"
"Yes, I'm sure!"
"Very well, then, we'll see."
The old man looked up into the tree and called:
"Come down, Little Singing Frog! A Prince wants to marry you!"
So the little frog girl hopped down from among the branches and stood
before the Prince.
"She's my own daughter," the laborer said, "even if she does look like a
frog."
"I don't care what she looks like," the Prince said. "I love her
singing and I love her. And I mean what I say: I'll marry her if she'll
marry me. My father, the Tsar, bids me and my brothers present him our
brides to-morrow. He bids all the brides bring him a flower and he says
he'll give the kingdom to the prince whose bride brings the loveliest
flower. Little Singing Frog, will you be my bride and will you come to
Court to-morrow bringing a flower?"
"Yes, my Prince," the frog girl said, "I will. But I must not shame you
by hopping to Court in the dust. I must ride. So, will you send me a
snow-white cock from your father's barnyard?"
"I will," the Prince promised, and before night the snow-white cock had
arrived at the laborer's cottage.
Early the next morning the frog girl prayed to the Sun.
"O golden Sun," she said, "I need your help! Give me some lovely clothes
woven of your golden rays for I would not shame my Prince when I go to
Court."
The Sun heard her prayer and gave her a gown of cloth of gold.
Instead of a flower she took a spear of wheat in her hand and then when
the time came she mounted the white cock and rode to the palace.
[Illustration: This, the Bride of the Youngest Prince, Is My Choice]
The guards at the palace gate at first refused to admit her.
"This is no place for frogs!" they said to her. "You're looking for a
pond!"
But when she told them she was the Youngest Prince's bride, they were
afraid to drive her away. So they let her ride through the gate.
"Strange!" they murmured to one another. "The Youngest Prince's bride!
She looks like a frog and that was certainly a cock she was riding,
wasn't it?"
They stepped inside the gates to look after her and then they saw an
amazing sight. The frog girl, still seated on the white cock, was
shaking out the folds of a golden gown. She dropped the gown over her
head and instantly there was no frog and no white cock but a lovely
maiden mounted on a snow-white horse!
Well, the frog girl entered the palace with two other girls, the
promised brides of the older princes. They were just ordinary girls both
of them. To see them you wouldn't have paid any attention to them one
way or the other. But standing beside the lovely bride of the Youngest
Prince they seemed more ordinary than ever.
The first girl had a rose in her hand. The Tsar looked at it and at her,
sniffed his nose slightly, and turned his head.
The second girl had a carnation. The Tsar looked at her for a moment and
murmured:
"Dear me, this will never do!"
Then he looked at the Youngest Prince's bride and his eye kindled and he
"Ah! This is something like!"
She gave him the spear of wheat and he took it and held it aloft. Then
he reached out his other hand to her and had her stand beside him as he
said to his sons and all the Court:
"This, the bride of the Youngest Prince, is my choice! See how beautiful
she is! And yet she knows the useful as well as the beautiful for she
has brought me a spear of wheat! The Youngest Prince shall be the Tsar
after me and she shall be Tsarina!"
So the little frog girl of whom her parents were ashamed married the
Youngest Prince and when the time came wore a Tsarina's crown.
THE NIGHTINGALE IN THE MOSQUE
The Story of the Sultan's Youngest Son and the Princess Flower o' the
World
There was once a Sultan who was so pious and devout that he spent many
hours every day in prayer.
"For the glory of Allah," he thought to himself, "I ought to build the
most beautiful mosque in the world."
So he called together the finest artisans in the country and told them
what he wanted. He spent a third of his riches on the undertaking, and
when the mosque was finished everybody said:
"See now, our Sultan has built the most beautiful mosque in the world
for the greater glory of Allah!"
On the first day when the Sultan went to pray in the new mosque, a
Dervish who was sitting cross-legged at the entrance spoke to him in a
droning sing-song voice and said:
"Nay, but your mosque is not yet beautiful enough! There is something it
lacks and your prayers will be unavailing!"
The words of the holy man grieved the Sultan and he had the mosque torn
down and another built in its place even more beautiful.
"This is certainly the most beautiful mosque in the world!" the people
said, and the Sultan's heart was very happy on the first day as he went
in to pray.
But again the Dervish, seated at the entrance, said to him in his
droning, sing-song voice:
At the holy man's words the Sultan had the second mosque torn down and a
third one built, the most beautiful of them all. But when it was
finished for a third time the Dervish droned out:
"What can I do?" the Sultan cried. "I have spent all my riches and now I
have no means wherewith to build another mosque!"
He fell to grieving and nothing any one could say would comfort him.
His three sons came to him and said:
"Father, is there not something we can do for you?"
The Sultan sighed and shook his head.
"Nothing, my sons, unless indeed you were to find out for me why my
third mosque is not the most beautiful in the world."
"Brothers," the youngest suggested, "let us go to the Dervish and ask
him why it is that the third mosque is not yet beautiful enough. Perhaps
he will tell us what is lacking."
So they went to the Dervish and asked him what he meant by saying to the
Sultan that the third mosque was not yet beautiful enough and they
begged him to tell them what it was that was lacking.
The Dervish fixed his eyes in the distance and slightly swaying his body
back and forth answered them in his sing-song tone.
"The mosque is beautiful," he said, "and the fountain in its midst is
beautiful, but where is the glorious Nightingale Gisar? With the
Nightingale Gisar singing beside the fountain, then indeed would the
Sultan's third mosque be the most beautiful mosque in the world!"
"Only tell us where this glorious Nightingale is," the brothers begged,
"and we will get him if it costs us our lives!"
"I cannot tell you that," the Dervish droned. "You will have to go out
into the world and find him for yourselves."
So the three brothers returned to the Sultan and told him what the
Dervish had said.
"All your third mosque lacks to be the most beautiful mosque in the
world," they told him, "is the Nightingale Gisar singing beside the
fountain. So grieve no more, father. We, your three sons, will go out
into the world in quest of this glorious bird and within a year's time
we will return with the bird in our hands if so be that it is anywhere
to be found in all the wide world."
The Sultan blessed them and they set forth the three of them, side by
side. They traveled together until they reached a place where three
roads branched. Upon the stone of the left-hand road nothing was
written. Upon the stone of the middle road was the inscription: Who
goes this way returns. The inscription on the third stone read: Who
goes this way shall meet many dangers and may never return.
"Let us part here," the oldest brother said, "and each take a separate
road. Then if all goes well, let us meet here again on this same spot
one year hence. As our father's oldest son it would be wrong for me to
run unnecessary risks, so I will take the left-hand road."
"And I will take the middle road," the second brother cried.
The Youngest Brother laughed and said:
"That leaves the dangerous road for me! Very well, brothers, that's the
very road I wish to take for why should I leave home if it were not to
have adventures! Farewell then until we meet again in one year's time."
The oldest traveled his safe road until he reached a city where he
became a barber. He asked every man whose head he shaved:
"Do you know anything of the Nightingale Gisar?"
He never found any one who had even heard of the bird, so after a time
he stopped asking.
The second brother followed the middle road to a city where he settled
down and opened a coffee-house.
"Have you ever heard of a glorious Nightingale known as Gisar?" he asked
at first of every traveler who came in and sipped his coffee. Not one of
them ever had and as time went by the second brother gradually stopped
even making inquiries.
The Youngest Brother who took the dangerous road came to no city at all
but to a far-off desolate place without houses or highways or farms.
Wild creatures hid in the brush and snakes glided in and out among the
rocks. One day he came upon a wild woman who was combing her hair with a
branch of juniper.
"That isn't the way to comb your hair," the Youngest Brother said.
"Here, let me show you."
He took his own comb and smoothed out all the tangles in the wild
woman's hair until she was comfortable and happy.
"You have been very kind to me," she said. "Now isn't there something I
can do for you in return?"
"I am looking for the Nightingale Gisar. If you know where that glorious
bird is, tell me and that will more than repay me."
But the wild woman had never heard of the Nightingale Gisar.
"Only wild animals inhabit this desolate place," she said, "and a few
wild people like me. The Nightingale Gisar is not here."
"Then I must go farther," the Youngest Brother said.
This the wild woman begged him not to do.
"Beyond these mountains," she said, "is a wilder desert with fiercer
animals. Turn back while you can."
"No," the Youngest Brother insisted, "I'm going as God leads me."
So he left the wild woman and crossed the mountains. He went on and on
until he was footsore and weary. Then at last he came to the Tiger's
The Tiger's wife met him.
"Be off, young man!" she warned him, "or the Tiger when he comes home
will eat you!"
"No!" said the Youngest Brother, "now I'm here I'm going to stay for I
have a question to ask the Tiger."
The Tiger's wife was making bread. When the dough was ready to go into
the oven, she leaned over the glowing embers of the fire and began to
brush them aside with her body.
"Stop!" the Youngest Brother cried. "You will burn yourself!"
"But how else can I brush aside the glowing embers?" the Tiger's wife
asked.
"I'll show you."
The Youngest Brother cut a branch from a tree outside and fashioned it
into a rough broom. Then he showed the Tiger's wife how to use it.
"Ah!" she said gratefully, "before this always when I've baked bread
I've been sick for ten days afterwards. Now I shall be sick no more for
you have taught me how to use a broom. In return let me hide you in a
dark corner and when the Tiger comes home I'll tell him how kind you
have been and perhaps he will not eat you."
So she hid the Youngest Brother in a dark corner and when the Tiger
came home she met him and said:
"See, I have baked bread to-day but I am not sick, for a youth has shown
me how I can brush aside the embers without burning myself."
The Tiger was overjoyed to hear that his wife had been able to bake
bread without being made sick and he swore to be a brother to him who
had taught her the use of a broom. So the Youngest Brother came out from
the dark corner where he was hiding and the Tiger made him welcome.
"What are you doing wandering about in this wild country?" the Tiger
"I am searching for the Nightingale Gisar and I have come to you to ask
you if you can tell me where I can find that glorious bird."
The Tiger had never heard of the Nightingale Gisar but he thought that
his oldest brother the Lion might know.
"Go straight on from here," he said, "until you come to the Lion's
house. His old wife stands outside facing the house with her long thin
old dugs thrown over her shoulders. Go up to her from behind and take
her dugs and put them in your mouth and suck them and when she asks you
who you are, say: 'Don't you know me, old mother? I'm your oldest cub.'
Then she will lead you in to the Lion who is so old that his eyelids
droop. Prop them open and when he sees you he will tell you what he
knows."
So the Youngest Brother went on to the Lion's house and he found the
Lion's old wife standing outside as the Tiger said he would. He did all
the Tiger had told him to do and when the Lion's wife asked him who he
was, he said: 'Don't you know me, old mother? I'm your oldest cub.' Then
the Lion's old wife led him in to the Lion and he propped open the
Lion's drooping eyelids and asked about the Nightingale Gisar.
The old Lion shook his head.
"I have never heard of the Nightingale Gisar. He has never sung in this
wild place. Turn back, young man, and seek him elsewhere. Beyond this is
a country of wilder creatures where you will only lose your life."
"That is as God wills," the Youngest Brother said.
With that he bade the old Lion and his old wife farewell and pushed on
into the farther wilds. The mountains grew more and more rugged, the
plains more parched and barren, and the Youngest Son was hard put to it
to find food from day to day.
Once when he was crossing a desert three eagles swooped down upon him
and it was all he could do to fight them off. He slashed at them with
his sword and succeeded in cutting off the beak of one, a wing of
another, and a leg of the third. He put these three things in his bag as
trophies.
He came at last to a hut where an old woman was baking cakes on the
hearth.
"God bless you, granny!" he said. "Can you give me a bite of supper and
shelter for the night?"
The old woman shook her head.
"My boy, you had better not stop here. I have three daughters and if
they were to come home and find you here, they'd kill you."
But the Youngest Brother insisted that he was not afraid and at last the
old woman let him stay. She hid him in the corner behind the firewood
and warned him to keep still.
Presently the three eagles whom he had maimed came flying into the hut.
The old woman put a bowl of milk on the table, the birds dipped in the
milk, and lo! their feather shirts opened and they stepped out three
maidens. One of them had lost her lips, one an arm, and the third a leg.
"Ah!" they cried to their mother, "see what has befallen us! If only the
youth who maimed us would return the beak and the wing and the leg that
he hacked off, we would tell him anything he wants to know."
At that the Youngest Brother stepped out from behind the firewood and
"Tell me then where I can find the Nightingale Gisar and you shall have
back your beak and your wing and your leg."
He opened his bag and the maidens were overjoyed to see their beak and
their wing and their leg. Then they told the Youngest Brother all they
knew about the Nightingale Gisar.
"Far from here," they said, "there is a Warrior Princess, so beautiful
that men call her Flower o' the World. She has the Nightingale Gisar in
a golden cage hanging in her own chamber. The chamber door is guarded by
a lion and a wolf and a tiger for the Flower o' the World knows that she
will have to marry the man who steals from her the Nightingale Gisar."
"How can a man enter the chamber of the Flower o' the World?" the
Youngest Brother asked.
"For a few moments at midnight," the sisters told him, "the three
animals sleep. During those few moments a man could enter the chamber,
get the Nightingale Gisar, and escape. But even then he might not be
safe for the Flower o' the World might gather her army together and
pursue him."
"Now tell me how to reach the palace of that Warrior Princess, Flower o'
the World."
"You could never get there alone," they told him, "the way is too long
and the dangers are too many. Stay here with us for three months and at
the end of three months we will carry you thither on our wings."
So for three months the Youngest Brother stayed on in the hut with the
old woman and her three daughters. The three daughters flew in their
eagle shirts to the spring of the Water of Life and bathing in that
magic pool they made grow on again the beak and the wing and the leg
which the Youngest Brother had hacked off.
At the end of three months they carried the Youngest Brother on their
wings to the distant kingdom where the Warrior Princess, Flower o' the
World, lived.
At midnight they set him down in front of the palace and he slipped
unseen through the guards at the gate and through the halls of the
palace to the Princess's own chamber. The lion, the wolf, and the tiger
were asleep and he was able to push back the curtain before which they
were lying and creep up to the Princess's very bedside without being
discovered.
He looked once at the sleeping Flower o' the World and she was so
beautiful that he dared not look again for fear he should forget the
Nightingale Gisar and betray himself by crying out.
At the head of the bed were four lighted candles and at the foot four
unlighted ones. He blew out the lighted ones and lit the others. Then
quickly he took the golden cage in which the Nightingale Gisar was
perched asleep, unfastened it from the golden chain on which it was
hanging, and hurried out. The eagles were waiting for him and at once
they spread their wings and carried him away.
They put him down at the crossroads where he had parted from his
brothers just one year before. Then they bade him farewell and flew off
to their home in the desert.
"My brothers will probably be here in an hour or so," the Youngest Son
thought. "I had better wait for them."
He felt sleepy, so he lay down by the roadside and closed his eyes.
While he slept his brothers arrived and of course the first thing they
saw was the golden cage and the Nightingale Gisar.
Then envy and hatred filled their hearts and they began cursing and
complaining to think that he who was the Youngest had succeeded where
they had failed.
"We'll be the laughing-stock of the whole country!" they said, "if we
let him come home carrying the Nightingale Gisar! Let us take the bird
while he sleeps and hurry home with it. Then if he comes home later and
says it was he who really found the bird no one will believe him."
So they beat their brother into insensibility and tore his clothes to
rags to make him think that he had been set upon by robbers, and then
taking the golden cage and the Nightingale Gisar they hurried home and
presented themselves to their father, the Sultan.
"Here, O father," they said, "is the Nightingale Gisar! To get this
glorious bird for you we have endured all the perils in the world!"
"And your Youngest Brother," the Sultan asked, "where is he?"
"The Youngest? Think no more of him, father, for he is unworthy to be
your son. Instead of searching the wide world for the Nightingale Gisar,
he settled down in the first city he reached and lived a life of
idleness and ease. Some say he became a barber and some say he opened a
coffee-house and spent his days chatting with passing travelers. He has
not come home with us for no doubt it shames him to know that we have
succeeded where he has failed."
The Sultan was grieved to hear this evil report of his Youngest Son, but
he was overjoyed to have the Nightingale Gisar. He had the golden cage
carried to the mosque and hung beside the fountain in the court.
But imagine his disappointment when the bird refused to sing!
"Let him who found the Nightingale come to the mosque," the Dervish said
in his droning sing-song voice, "and then the Nightingale will sing."
The Sultan immediately sent for his two sons. They came but still the
bird was silent.
"See now," the Sultan said, "my two sons are here and yet the bird is
silent."
But the Dervish would only repeat:
"Let him who found the Nightingale come to the mosque and then the
Nightingale will sing."
The next day a youth in rags whom nobody knew entered the mosque to pray
and instantly the Nightingale began to sing.
A messenger was sent running to the Sultan with the news that the
Nightingale was singing. The Sultan hurried to the mosque but by the
time he got there the beggar youth was gone and the Nightingale had
stopped singing.
"Now that I'm here," cried the Sultan, "why does the bird not sing?"
The Dervish, swaying his body gently back and forth, made answer as
before:
Thereafter every day when the beggar youth came to the mosque to pray
the Nightingale sang, and always when the Sultan approached the beggar
walked away and the bird stopped singing. At last people began
whispering:
"Strange that the Nightingale should sing only when that beggar youth is
near! And yet the Dervish says it will not sing unless he who found it
comes to the mosque! What can he mean?"
Report of the beggar youth reached the ears of the Sultan and he went to
the Dervish and questioned him.
"Why do you say that the Nightingale Gisar will not sing unless he who
found him comes to the mosque? Lo, here are my two sons who found him
and the bird remains silent, yet people tell me that when a certain
beggar comes to the mosque he sings. Why does he not sing when I and my
two sons come to pray?"
And always the Dervish made the same answer in the same sing-song voice:
Soon a terrifying rumor spread through the land that a great Warrior
Princess called Flower o' the World was coming with a mighty army to
make war on the Sultan and to destroy his city. Her army far outnumbered
the Sultan's and when she encamped in a broad valley over against the
city the Sultan's people, seeing her mighty hosts, were filled with
dread and besought their ruler to make peace with the Princess at any
cost. So the Sultan called his heralds and sent them to her and through
them he said:
"Demand of me what you will even to my life but spare my city."
The Warrior Princess returned this answer:
"I will spare you and your city provided you deliver me your son who
stole from me the Nightingale Gisar. Him I shall have executed or let
live as it pleases me."
Now the Sultan's two sons knew that the Flower o' the World was fated to
marry the man who had stolen from her the Nightingale Gisar, so when
they heard the Princess's demand they were overjoyed thinking that she
would have to fall in love with one of them. So they disputed at great
length as to which of them had done the actual deed of taking the bird,
each insisting that it was he and not his brother. The Sultan himself
had finally to decide between them.
"You have told me," he said, "that you captured the bird together. As
that is the case and as I can't send you both to the Warrior Princess it
is only right that the older should go."
So under a splendid escort the oldest son rode to the tent of the
Warrior Princess. She bade him enter alone and when he appeared before
her she looked at him long and steadily. Then she said:
"Nay, but you are never the man who stole from me the Nightingale Gisar!
You would lack the courage to face the perils of the way!"
The oldest prince answered the Flower o' the World craftily:
"But how, Princess, if I did not steal from you the Nightingale Gisar
was I then able to bring back that glorious bird and hang his cage
beside the fountain in the mosque?"
But Flower o' the World was not to be deceived by such specious words.
"Tell me then," she said, "if it was you who stole my glorious
Nightingale, where did you find him hanging in his golden cage?"
The oldest prince could not answer this, so he said at random:
"I found his golden cage hanging in the cypress tree that grows in the
garden of your palace."
"Enough!" cried the Princess.
She clapped her hands and when her guards appeared she said to them:
"Have this man executed at once and let his head be sent to the Sultan
with the message: This is the head of a liar and a coward! Send me at
once your son who stole my glorious Nightingale Gisar or I will march
against your city!"
The Sultan was greatly shocked to receive this message together with the
head of his oldest son.
"Alas!" he cried, calling his second son, "would that I had listened to
you when you insisted that it was you and not your brother who actually
did the deed! Unhappily I listened to your brother! See now the awful
result of this mistake! Go you now to this heartless Princess whom men
call Flower o' the World or else our poor defenseless city will have to
pay the penalty."
So the second prince was taken to the tent of the Warrior Maiden and she
put to him the same questions and he fared even worse than his brother
had fared. So his head, too, was sent to the Sultan with this message:
"Send me no more liars and cowards but the son who actually did steal
from me my glorious Nightingale Gisar."
In despair the Sultan went to the mosque to pray. As he bowed his head
he heard the Nightingale burst forth in song. Then when he looked up he
saw a beggar youth standing near the fountain.
When his prayers were finished the Sultan went outside to the Dervish
and said to him:
"The Warrior Princess, Flower o' the World, demands that I send her
another son. I know not where my Third Son is. What shall I do?"
Without looking at the Sultan the Dervish answered in his sing-song
"Send her the son for whom the Nightingale sings."
The Sultan turned away in disappointment, not understanding what the
Dervish meant, but one of his attendants plucked his sleeve and
"The Nightingale sings for yonder beggar youth. Perhaps it is he the
Dervish means. Why not ask him if he will go to Flower o' the World in
place of your Youngest Son?"
[Illustration: The Flower o' the World Asleep]
The Sultan nodded, so the attendant called the beggar youth and the
Sultan asked him would he go to the Warrior Princess as the Youngest
"Allah alone knows where my Youngest Son is," the Sultan said, "but he
is just about your age and if you were washed and anointed and dressed
in fitting garments you would not be unlike him."
The beggar youth said he would go but he insisted on going just as he
was. The Sultan begged him to go dressed as a prince or the Flower o'
the World might not receive him.
"No," said the youth, "I shall go as a beggar or not at all. It is for
the Flower o' the World to know me whether or not I am the Sultan's
Youngest Son and the man who stole from her the Nightingale Gisar."
So he went as he was to the tent of the Flower o' the World and her
warriors when they saw him coming said to the Princess:
"This Sultan mocks you and sends you a beggar when you demand his Third
Son."
But the Flower o' the World ordered them all out and bade the beggar
enter alone. She looked at him long and steadily and she saw through his
rags that he was indeed a noble youth with a body made strong and
beautiful through exercise and toil and she thought to herself:
"It were not a hard fate to marry this youth!"
Then she questioned him:
"Are you the Sultan's Third Son?"
"I am."
"Then why are you dressed as a beggar?"
"Because I was set upon at the crossroads and beaten insensible and my
clothes torn to rags. I was coming home with the Nightingale Gisar in my
hands and I lay down at the roadside to rest while I awaited the coming
of my brothers. When I awoke to consciousness the Nightingale and its
golden cage were gone. I came home to my father's city as a beggar and
there they told me that my brothers had come just before me bringing
with them the Nightingale and boasting of the perils they had been
through and the dangers they had faced. But the Nightingale, they told
me, hanging in its golden cage beside the fountain, was silent. Yet when
I went to the mosque it always sang."
The Warrior Princess looked deep into his eyes and knew that he was
speaking truth. Her heart was touched with compassion at the wrong he
had suffered from his brothers, but she hid her feelings and questioned
him further.
"Then it was you," she said, "who really took from me my glorious
Nightingale Gisar?"
"Yes, Princess, it was. I crept past the lion and the wolf and the tiger
just after midnight while they slept. I blew out the four candles at the
head of your bed and lighted those at the foot. The golden cage of the
Nightingale was hanging from a golden chain. Before I unfastened it I
looked at you once, as you lay sleeping, and dared not look a second
"Why not?" the Princess asked.
"Because, O Flower o' the World, you were so beautiful that I feared,
were I to look again, I should forget the Nightingale Gisar and cry out
in ecstacy."
Then the compassion in the Princess's heart changed to love and she knew
for a certainty that this was the man she was fated to wed.
She clapped her hands and when the guards came in she said to them:
"Call my warriors together that I may show them the Sultan's Youngest
Son and the man who stole from me my glorious Nightingale Gisar and whom
I am fated to wed."
So the warriors came in until they crowded the tent to its utmost. Then
the Princess stood up and took the Sultan's Youngest Son by the hand and
presented him to the warriors and told them of his great bravery and
courage and of all the perils he had endured in order to get the
Nightingale Gisar for his father's mosque.
"He came to me now as a beggar," she said, "but I knew him at once for
truth was in his mouth and courage in his eye. Behold, O warriors, your
future lord!"
Then the warriors waved their swords and cried:
"Long live the Flower o' the World! Long live the Sultan's Youngest
Son!"
All the Princess's army when they heard the news raised such a mighty
shout that the people in the Sultan's city heard and were filled with
dread not knowing what it meant. But soon they knew and then they, too,
went mad with joy that what had threatened to be a war was turning to a
wedding!
The Flower o' the World and her chief warriors and with them the
Youngest Prince rode slowly to the city. The Prince was now dressed as
befitted his rank and the Sultan when he saw him recognized him at once.
"Allah be praised!" he cried, "my Youngest Son lives!"
Then they told him all--how it was this Prince and not the older
brothers who had found the Nightingale Gisar and how the older brothers
had robbed him of his prize and beaten him insensible.
When the Sultan heard how wicked his older sons had been his grief for
their death was assuaged.
"Allah be praised," he said, "that I have at least one son who is
worthy!"
After the betrothal ceremony the Sultan and the Youngest Prince went to
the mosque to pray. While they prayed the Nightingale sang so gloriously
that it seemed to them they were no longer on earth but in Paradise.
When their prayers were finished and they were passing out, the Dervish
raised his sing-song voice and said:
"Now indeed is the Sultan's Mosque the most beautiful Mosque in the
World for the Nightingale Gisar sings beside the Fountain!"
THE GIRL IN THE CHEST
The Story of the Third Sister Who Was Brave and Good
There was once a horrible Vampire who took the form of a handsome young
man and went to the house of an old woman who had three daughters and
pretended he wanted to marry the oldest.
"I live far from here," the Vampire said. "I own my own farm and am
well-to-do and in marrying me your daughter would get a desirable
husband. Indeed, I am so well off that I don't have to ask any dowry."
Now the old woman was so poor that she couldn't have given a penny of
dowry. That was the only reason why all three of her daughters hadn't
long ago been married to youths of their own village. So when the
stranger said he would require no dowry, the old woman whispered to her
oldest daughter:
"He seems to be all right. Perhaps you had better take him."
The poor girl accepted her mother's advice and that afternoon started
off with the Vampire who said he would lead her home and marry her.
They walked a great distance and as evening came on they reached a wild
ghostly spot which frightened the girl half to death.
"This way, my dear," the Vampire said, pushing her into an opening in
the earth. "We take this underground passage and soon we'll be home."
The passage led to a sort of cave which really was the Vampire's home.
"What an awful place!" the poor girl cried in terror. "Let me out!"
"Let you out, indeed!" the Vampire sneered, taking his own horrible
shape and laughing cruelly. "Here you are and here you stay and if you
don't do everything I tell you, I'll soon finish you! Here now, drink
this."
He offered the poor girl a pitcher and when she saw what was in it she
nearly fainted with horror.
"No!" she cried. "I won't! I won't!"
"If you don't drink this," the Vampire said, darkly, "then I'll drink
And with that he killed her with no more feeling than if she were a fly.
Then in a short time he went back to the old woman and said:
"Dear mother, my poor wife is ill and she begs that you send her your
second daughter to nurse her. She asks for her sister night and day and
I fear she will die unless she sees her."
When the poor old mother heard this, she begged the second daughter to
go at once with the young man and nurse her sick sister.
Well, the same thing happened to the second sister and in no time at all
the Vampire had killed her, too, to satisfy his awful thirst.
Then he returned again to the old mother and this time he pretended that
both sisters were sick and were trying for the third sister to come and
nurse them. So the poor old woman sent her Youngest Daughter away with
the Vampire.
The Youngest Sister when she found out the truth about the horrid
Vampire didn't sit down and weep helplessly as the others had done and
wait for the Vampire to kill her, but she prayed God's help and then
tried to find some way of escape.
There were doors in the cave which the Vampire told her were doors to
closets she must not enter. When the Vampire was out she opened these
doors and found that they all led into long underground passages.
"This is my one chance to get back to earth!" the girl thought and
commending her undertaking to God she fled down one of the passages.
You may be sure the Vampire when he came back and found her gone fell
into a great rage. He went running wildly up and down the various
passages and lost so much time searching the wrong passages that the
girl was able to make good her escape and reach the upper world in
safety.
She came out in a wood with no sign of human habitation anywhere in
"What shall I do now?" she thought. "If I stay here alone and
unprotected some wild beast or evil creature may get me."
So she knelt down and prayed God to give her a chest that she could lock
from the inside with one of her own golden hairs so securely that no one
could force it open. God heard her prayer and presently behind some
bushes she found just such a chest. When it grew dark and she was ready
to go to bed, she crept into the chest, locked it with a hair, and slept
peacefully knowing that nothing could harm her.
So she lived in the wood some time, eating berries and fruits, and
sleeping safely in the chest.
Now it so happened that the King's son one morning went hunting in this
very wood and caught a glimpse of the girl as she was gathering berries.
He thought he had never seen such a beautiful creature and instantly he
fell in love with her. But when he reached the clump of bushes where he
had seen her, she was gone. He called his huntsmen together and told
them to search everywhere. They hunted for hours and all they could find
was a chest. They tried to open the chest to see what was in it but
couldn't.
"Waste no more time over it," the Prince said at last. "Carry it home to
the palace as it is and have it placed in my chamber."
The huntsmen did this and a few hours later when the girl peeped out of
her chest she found herself alone in the Prince's chamber. His supper
was standing on a table in readiness for his coming. The girl ate the
supper and was safely back in her chest before he arrived. When he did
come the Prince was amazed to see empty plates and called the servants
to know who had eaten his supper. The servants were as much surprised as
the Prince and declared that no one had entered the chamber.
The same thing happened the next day and the following day the Prince
had one of his servants hide behind the curtains and watch to find out
if possible how the food disappeared.
The story the servant had to tell of what he saw was so thrilling that
the Prince could scarcely wait for the next day when he himself hid
behind the curtains and watched.
The serving people put the food on the table and retired and presently
the lid of the chest opened and the Prince saw the beautiful maiden of
the wood step out. When she sat down at the table the Prince slipped up
behind her and caught her in his arms.
"You lovely creature!" he said, "I'm not going to let you escape me
again!"
At first the girl was greatly frightened but the Prince reassured her,
telling her that he loved her dearly and only wanted to make her his
He led her at once to the King, his father, and the girl was so modest
and lovely that the King soon agreed to the marriage.
[Illustration: The Chest Opened and the Prince Saw the Beautiful
Maiden]
Everybody in court was delighted--everybody, that is, but the
Chamberlain who had had hopes of marrying his own daughter to the
Prince. His daughter was an ugly ill-tempered girl and the Prince had
never even looked at her. The Chamberlain was sure, however, that with a
little more time he could arrange the match to his liking. So the
appearance of this beautiful girl who came from Heaven knows where threw
him into a fearful rage and he decided to do away with her at any cost.
Now he had in his employ a great burly Blackamoor. He called this
fellow to him and he told him that he must kidnap the girl at once and
kill her. The Blackamoor who was accustomed to do such deeds for the
Chamberlain nodded and said he would.
So when the palace was quiet that night he stole to the bedchamber where
the girl was lying asleep, threw a great robe over her head to stifle
her cries, and carried her off. She fainted away from fright and the
Blackamoor thinking her dead tossed her into a field of nettles in the
outskirts of the town.
Now, as you can imagine, in the morning there was a great uproar in the
palace when it was discovered that the Prince's beautiful bride-to-be
had disappeared. The Prince was utterly grief-stricken and refused to
eat. The King and all the ladies of the court tried their best to
comfort him but he turned away from them declaring he would die if his
bride were not restored to him.
The rascally Chamberlain put his handkerchief to his eyes and pretended
to weep he was so affected by the sight of the Prince's grief.
"My dear boy," he said, "I would that I could find this maiden for you!
It breaks my heart to see you sad and unhappy! But I'm sorry to tell you
that I hear she was a Vila and not a human maiden at all. You know how
mysteriously she came, and now she's gone just as mysteriously. So put
the thought of her out of your mind and I'm sure you'll soon find a
human maiden who is worthy of your love. Come here, my daughter, and
tell the Prince how sorry you are that he is in grief."
But the sight of the Chamberlain's ugly daughter only made the Prince
long the more for the beautiful girl who was gone.
She meantime had found refuge in the hut of an old woman who had heard
her groan in the early dawn when she lay among the nettles and had taken
compassion on her.
"You may stay with me until you're well," the old woman said.
The girl was young and healthy and in a day or two had recovered the ill
treatment she had suffered at the hands of the Blackamoor.
"Won't you let me live with you awhile, granny?" she said to the old
woman. "I'll cook and scrub and work and you won't have to regret the
little I eat."
"Can you cook? Because if you can perhaps you know a dish that would
tempt the appetite of our poor young Prince," the old woman said. "You
know the poor boy has had a terrible disappointment in love and he
refuses to eat. The heralds were out this morning proclaiming that the
King would richly reward any one who could prepare a dish that would
tempt the Prince's appetite."
"Granny!" the girl said, "I know a wonderful way to prepare beans! Let
me cook a dish of beans and do you carry them to the palace."
So the girl cooked the beans and placed them prettily in a dish and on
one side of the dish she put a tiny little ringlet of her own golden
hair.
"If he sees the hair," she thought to herself, "he'll know the beans are
from me."
And that's exactly what happened. To please his father the Prince had
consented to look at every dish as it came. He had already looked at
hundreds of them before the old woman arrived and turned away from them
all. Then the old woman came. As she passed before the Prince, she
lifted the cover of the dish, held it towards him, and curtsied. The
Prince was just about to turn away when he saw the tiny ringlet of hair.
"Oh!" he said. "Wait a minute! Those beans look good!"
To the King's delight he took the dish out of the old woman's hand,
examined it carefully, and when no one was looking slipped the ringlet
into his pocket. Then he ate the beans--every last one of them!
The King gave the old woman some golden ducats and begged her to prepare
another dish for the Prince on the morrow.
So the next day the girl again sent a tiny ringlet of her hair on the
side of the plate and again the Prince after scorning all the other food
offered him took the old woman's dish and ate it clean.
On the third day the Prince engaged the old woman in conversation.
"Where do you live, granny?"
"In a little tumble-down house beside the nettles," she told him.
"Do you live alone?"
"Just now," the old woman said, "I have a dear girl living with me. I
found her one morning lying in the nettles where some ruffians had left
her for dead. She's a good girl and she scrubs and bakes and cooks for
me and lets me rest my poor old bones."
Now the Prince knew what he wanted to know.
"Granny," he said, "to-morrow's Sunday. Now I want you to stay home in
the afternoon because I'm coming to see you."
In great excitement the old woman hurried home and told the girl that
the Prince was coming to see them on Sunday afternoon.
"He mustn't see me!" the girl said. "I'll hide in the bread trough under
a cloth and if he goes looking for me you tell him that I've gone out."
"Foolish child!" the old woman said. "Why should you hide from a
handsome young man like the Prince?"
But the girl insisted and at last when Sunday afternoon came the old
woman was forced to let her lie down in the bread trough and cover her
with a cloth.
The Prince arrived and when he found the old woman there alone he was
mightily disappointed.
"Where's that girl who lives with you?" he asked.
"She's gone out," the old woman said.
"Then I think I'll wait till she comes back."
This made the old woman feel nervous.
"But, my Prince, I don't know when she's coming back."
Just then the Prince thought he saw something move in the bread trough.
"What's that lumpy thing in the bread trough, granny?"
"That? Oh, that's just dough that's rising, my Prince. I'm baking
to-day."
"Then make me a loaf, granny. I'll wait for it until it rises and until
you bake it. Then I'll eat it hot out of the oven."
What was the old woman to say to that? She fussed and fidgeted and
thought again what a foolish young girl that was to be hiding in the
bread trough when there was a handsome young Prince in the room.
"I don't know why that dough doesn't rise," she remarked at last.
"Perhaps there's something the matter with it," the Prince said.
Before the old woman could stop him, he jumped up, tossed the cloth
aside, and there was his lovely bride!
"Why are you hiding from me?" he asked as he lifted her up and kissed
her tenderly.
"Because I knew if you really loved me you would find me," she said.
"Now that I have found you," the Prince declared, "I shall never let you
leave me again."
Then the girl told the Prince about the wicked Chamberlain and the
Blackamoor and it was all she and the old woman could do to keep the
Prince from drawing his sword and rushing out instantly to kill both of
The old woman begged the Prince to take the girl secretly to the King
and have the King hear her story, and then let him pass judgment on the
Chamberlain according to the laws of the land. At last the Prince agreed
to this.
So they covered the girl's head with a veil and took her to the King.
When the King heard her story he called the court together at once and
told them the outrage that had been committed against his son's promised
bride. He commanded that the murderous Blackamoor be executed the next
day and he decreed that the Chamberlain and his wicked daughter be
stripped of their lands and riches and sent into exile.
Let us hope that exile taught them the evil of their ways and made them
repent.
As for the girl, she married the Prince and they lived together in great
happiness. And she deserved to be happy, too, for she was a brave girl
and a good girl and God loves people who are brave and good and blesses
The Story of a Poor Man Who Dreamed of an Angel
There was once a poor man who had so many children that he was at his
wit's end how to feed them all and clothe them.
"Unless something turns up soon," he thought to himself, "we shall all
starve to death. Poor youngsters--I'm almost tempted to kill them with
my own hands to save them from suffering the pangs of hunger!"
That night before he went to sleep he prayed God to give him help. God
heard his prayer and sent an angel to him in a dream.
The angel said to him:
"To-morrow morning when you wake, put your hand under your pillow and
you will find a mirror, a red handkerchief, and an embroidered scarf.
Without saying a word to any one hide these things in your shirt and go
out to the woods that lie beyond the third hill from the village. There
you will find a brook. Follow it until you come to a beautiful maiden
who is bathing in its waters. You will know her from the great masses of
golden hair that fall down over her shoulders. She will speak to you
but do you be careful not to answer. If you say a word to her she will
be able to bewitch you. She will hold out a comb to you and ask you to
comb her hair. Take the comb and do as she asks. Then part her back hair
carefully and you will see one hair that is coarser than the others and
as red as blood. Wrap this firmly around one of your fingers and jerk it
out. Then flee as fast as you can. She will pursue you and each time as
she is about to overtake you drop first the embroidered scarf, then the
red handkerchief, and last the mirror. If you reach the hill nearest
your own village you are safe for she can pursue you no farther. Take
good care of the single hair for it great value and you can sell it for
many golden ducats."
In the morning when the poor man awoke and put his hand under his pillow
he found the mirror and the handkerchief and the scarf just as the angel
had said he would. So he hid them carefully in his shirt and without
telling any one where he was going he went to the woods beyond the third
hill from the village. Here he found the brook and followed it until he
came to a pool where he saw a lovely maiden bathing.
"Good day to you!" she said politely.
The poor man remembering the angel's warning made no answer.
[Illustration: The Mirror, the Handkerchief, and the Embroidered
Scarf]
The maiden held out a golden comb.
"Please comb my hair for me, won't you?"
The man nodded and took the comb. Then he parted the long tresses behind
and searched here and there and everywhere until he found the one hair
that was blood-red in color and coarser than the others. He twisted this
firmly around his finger, jerked it quickly out, and fled.
"Oh!" cried the maiden. "What are you doing? Give me back my one red
hair!"
She jumped to her feet and ran swiftly after him. As she came close to
him, he dropped behind him the embroidered scarf. She stooped and picked
it up and examined it awhile. Then she saw the man was escaping, so she
tossed the scarf aside and again ran after him. This time he dropped the
red handkerchief. Its bright color caught the maiden's eye and she
picked it up and lost a few more minutes admiring it while the man raced
on. Then the maiden remembered him, threw away the handkerchief, and
started off again in pursuit.
This time the man dropped the mirror and the maiden who of course was a
Vila and had never seen a mirror before picked it up and looked at it
and when she saw the lovely reflection of herself she was so amazed that
she kept on looking and looking. She was still looking in it and still
admiring her own beauty when the man reached the third hill beyond which
the maiden couldn't follow him.
So the poor man got home with the hair safely wound about his finger.
"It must be of great value," he thought to himself. "I'll take it to the
city and offer it for sale there."
So the next day he went to the city and went about offering his
wonderful hair to the merchants.
"What's so wonderful about it?" they asked him.
"I don't know, but I do know it's of great value," he told them.
"Well," said one of them, "I'll give you one golden ducat for it."
He was a shrewd buyer and the others hearing his bid of one golden ducat
decided that he must know that the hair was of much greater value. So
they began to outbid him until the price offered the poor man reached
one hundred golden ducats. But the poor man insisted that this was not
enough.
"One hundred golden ducats not enough for one red hair!" cried the
merchants.
They pretended to be disgusted that any one would refuse such a price
for one red hair, but in reality they were all firmly convinced by this
time that it was a magic hair and probably worth any amount of money in
the world.
The whole city became excited over the wonderful hair for which all the
merchants were bidding and for a time nothing else was talked about. The
matter was reported to the Tsar and at once he said that he himself
would buy the hair for one thousand golden ducats.
One thousand golden ducats! After that there was no danger of the poor
man's many children dying of starvation.
And what do you suppose the Tsar did with the hair? He had it split open
very carefully and inside he found a scroll of great importance to
mankind for on it were written many wonderful secrets of nature.
THE BEST WISH
The Story of Three Brothers and an Angel
There were once three brothers whose only possession was a pear tree.
They took turns guarding it. That is to say while two of them went to
work the third stayed at home to see that no harm came to the pear tree.
Now it happened that an Angel from heaven was sent down to test the
hearts of the three brothers. The Angel took the form of a beggar and
approaching the pear tree on a day when the oldest brother was guarding
it, he held out his hand and said:
"In heaven's name, brother, give me a ripe pear."
The oldest brother at once handed him a pear, saying:
"This one I can give you because it is mine, but none of the others
because they belong to my brothers."
The Angel thanked him and departed.
The next day when the second brother was on guard he returned in the
same guise and again begged the charity of a ripe pear.
"Take this one," the second brother said. "It is mine and I can give it
away. I can't give away any of the others because they belong to my
brothers."
The Angel thanked the second brother and departed.
The third day he had exactly the same experience with the youngest
brother.
On the following day the Angel, in the guise of a monk, came to the
brothers' house very early while they were still all at home.
"My sons," he said, "come with me and perhaps I can find you something
better to do than guard a single pear tree."
The brothers agreed and they all started out together. After walking
some time they came to the banks of a broad deep river.
"My son," the Angel said, addressing the oldest brother, "if I were to
grant you one wish, what you ask?"
"I'd be happy," the oldest brother said, "if all this water was turned
into wine and belonged to me."
[Illustration: The Angel Took the Form of a Beggar]
The Angel lifted his staff and made the sign of the cross and lo! the
water became wine from great wine-presses. At once numbers of casks
appeared and men filling them and rolling them about. A huge industry
sprang up with sheds and storehouses and wagons and men running
hither and thither and addressing the oldest brother respectfully as
"Master!"
"You have your wish," the Angel said. "See that you do not forget God's
poor now that you are rich. Farewell."
So they left the oldest brother in the midst of his wine and went on
farther until they came to a broad field where flocks of pigeons were
feeding.
"If I were to grant you one wish," the Angel said to the second brother,
"what would you ask?"
"I'd be happy, father, if all the pigeons in this field were turned to
sheep and belonged to me."
The Angel lifted his staff, made the sign of the cross, and lo! the
field was covered with sheep. Sheds appeared and houses and women, some
of them milking the ewes and others skimming the milk and making
cheeses. In one place men were busy preparing meat for the market and in
another cleaning wool. And all of them as they came and went spoke
respectfully to the second brother and called him, "Master!"
"You have your wish," the Angel said. "Stay here and enjoy prosperity
and see that you do not forget God's poor!"
Then he and the youngest brother went on their way.
"Now, my son," the Angel said, "you, too, may make one wish."
"I want but one thing, father. I pray heaven to grant me a truly pious
wife. That is my only wish."
"A truly pious wife!" the Angel cried. "My boy, you have asked the
hardest thing of all! Why, there are only three truly pious women in all
the world! Two of them are already married and the third is a princess
who is being sought in marriage at this very moment by two kings!
However, your brothers have received their wishes and you must have
yours, too. Let us go at once to the father of this virtuous princess
and present your suit."
So just as they were they trudged to the city where the princess lived
and presented themselves at the palace looking shabby and
travel-stained.
The king received them and when he heard their mission he looked at them
in amazement.
"This makes three suitors for my daughter's hand! Two kings and now this
young man all on the same day! How am I going to decide among them?"
"Let heaven decide!" the Angel said. "Cut three branches of grape-vine
and let the princess mark each branch with the name of a different
suitor. Then let her plant the three branches to-night in the garden
and to-morrow do you give her in marriage to the man whose branch has
blossomed during the night and by morning is covered with ripe clusters
of grapes."
The king and the two other suitors agreed to this and the princess named
and planted three branches of grape-vine. In the morning two of the
branches were bare and dry, but the third, the one which was marked with
the name of the youngest brother, was covered with green leaves and ripe
clusters of grapes. The king accepted heaven's ruling and at once led
his daughter to church where he had her married to the stranger and sent
her off with his blessing.
The Angel led the young couple to a forest and left them there.
A year went by and the Angel was sent back to earth to see how the three
brothers were faring. Assuming the form of an old beggar, he went to the
oldest brother who was busy among his wine-presses and begged the
charity of a cup of wine.
"Be off with you, you old vagabond!" the oldest brother shouted angrily.
"If I gave a cup of wine to every beggar that comes along I'd soon be a
beggar myself!"
wine and all the wine-presses disappeared and in their place flowed a
broad deep river.
"In your prosperity you have forgotten God's poor," the Angel said. "Go
back to your pear tree."
Then the Angel went to the second brother who was busy in his dairy.
"Brother," the Angel said, "in heaven's name, I pray you, give me a
morsel of cheese."
"A morsel of cheese, you lazy good-for-nothing!" the second brother
cried. "Be off with you or I'll call the dogs!"
sheep and the dairy and all the busy laborers disappeared and he and the
second brother were standing there alone in a field where flocks of
pigeons were feeding.
back to your pear tree!"
Then the Angel made his way to the forest where he had left the youngest
brother and his wife. He found them in great poverty living in a mean
little hut.
"God be with you!" said the Angel still in the guise of an old beggar.
"I pray you in heaven's name give me shelter for the night and a bite of
"We are poor ourselves," the youngest brother said.
"But come in, you are welcome to share what we have."
They put the old beggar to rest at the most comfortable place beside the
fire and the wife set three places for the evening meal. They were so
poor that the loaf that was baking in the oven was not made of grain
ground at the mill but of pounded bark gathered from the trees.
"Alas," the wife murmured to herself, "it shames me that we have no real
bread to put before our guest."
Imagine then her surprise when she opened the oven and saw a browned
loaf of wheaten bread.
"God be praised!" she cried.
She drew a pitcher of water at the spring but when she began pouring it
into the cups she found to her joy that it was changed to wine.
"In your happiness," the Angel said, "you have not forgotten God's poor
and God will reward you!"
He raised his staff, made the sign of the cross, and lo! the mean little
hut disappeared and in its place arose a stately palace full of riches
and beautiful things. Servants passed hither and thither and addressed
the poor man respectfully as "My lord!" and his wife as "My lady!"
The old beggar arose and as he went he blessed them both, saying:
"God gives you these riches and they will be yours to enjoy so long as
you share them with others."
They must have remembered the Angel's words for all their lives long
they were happy and prosperous.
THE VILAS' SPRING
The Story of the Brother Who Knew That Good Was Stronger Than Evil
There was once a rich man who had two sons. The older son was
overbearing, greedy, and covetous. He was dishonest, too, and thought
nothing of taking things that belonged to others. The younger brother
was gentle and kind. He was always ready to share what he had and he was
never known to cheat or to steal.
"He's little better than a fool!" the older brother used to say of him
scornfully.
When the brothers grew to manhood the old father died leaving directions
that they divide his wealth between them, share and share alike.
"Nonsense!" the older brother said. "That fool would only squander his
inheritance! To every poor beggar that comes along he'd give an alms
until soon my poor father's savings would be all gone! No! I'll give him
three golden ducats and a horse and tell him to get out and if he makes
a fuss I won't give him that much!"
So he said to his younger brother:
"You're a fool and you oughtn't to have a penny from our father's
estate. However, I'll give you three golden ducats and a horse on
condition that you clear out and never come back."
"Brother," the younger one said quietly, "you are doing me a wrong."
"What if I am?" sneered the older. "Wrong is stronger than Right just as
I am stronger than you. Be off with you now or I'll take from you even
these three golden ducats and the horse!"
Without another word the younger brother mounted the horse and rode
Time went by and at last the brothers chanced to meet on the highway.
"God bless you, brother!" the younger one said.
"Don't you go God-blessing me, you fool!" the older one shouted. "It
isn't God who is powerful in this world but the Devil!"
"No, brother," the other said, "you are wrong. God is stronger than the
Devil just as Good is stronger than Evil."
"Are you sure of that?"
"Yes, brother, I'm sure."
"Well, then, let us make a wager. I'll wager you a golden ducat that
Evil is stronger than Good and we'll let the first man we meet on this
road decide which of us is right. Do you agree?"
"Yes, brother, I agree."
They rode a short distance and overtook a man who seemed to be a monk.
He wasn't really a monk but the Devil himself disguised in the habit of
a monk. The older brother put the case to him and the false monk at once
"That's an easy question to decide. Of course Evil is stronger than Good
in this world."
Without a word the younger brother took out one of his golden ducats and
"Now," sneered the older one, "are you convinced?"
"No, brother, I am not. No matter what this monk says I know that Good
is stronger than Evil."
"You do, do you? Then suppose we repeat the wager and ask the next man
we meet to decide between us."
"Very well, brother, I'm willing."
The next man they overtook looked like an old farmer, but in reality he
was the Devil again who had taken the guise of a farmer. They put the
question to him and of course the Devil made the same answer:
"Evil is stronger than Good in this world."
So again the younger brother paid his wager but insisted that he still
believed Good to be stronger than Evil.
"Then we'll make a third wager," the other said.
With the Devil's help the older brother won the third golden ducat which
was all the money the younger one had. Then the older brother suggested
that they wager their horses and the Devil, disguised in another form,
again acted as umpire and the younger one of course lost his horse.
"Now I have nothing more to lose," he said, "but I am still so sure that
Good is stronger than Evil that I am willing to wager the very eyes out
of my head!"
"The more fool you!" the other one cried brutally.
Without another word he knocked his younger brother down and gouged out
his eyes.
"Now let God take care of you if He can! As for me I put my trust in the
Devil!"
"May God forgive you for speaking so!" the younger one said.
"I don't care whether He does or not! Nothing can harm me! I'm strong
and I'm rich and I know how to take care of myself. As for you, you poor
blind beggar, is there anything you would like me to do for you before I
ride away?"
[Illustration: Vilas at Play]
"All I ask of you, brother, is that you lead me to the spring that is
under the fir tree not far from here. There I can bathe my wounds and
sit in the shade."
"I'll do that much for you," the older one said, taking the blinded man
by the hand. "For the rest, God will have to take care of you."
With that he led him over to the fir tree and left him. The blinded man
groped his way to the spring and bathed his wounds, then sat down under
the tree and prayed God for help and protection.
When night came he fell asleep and he slept until midnight when he was
awakened by the sound of voices at the spring. A company of Vilas were
bathing and playing as they bathed. He was blind, as you remember, so he
couldn't see their beautiful forms but he knew that they must be Vilas
from their voices which were as sweet as gurgling waters and murmuring
treetops. Human voices are never half so lovely. Yes, they must be Vilas
from the mountains and the woods.
"Ho, sisters!" cried one of them, "if only men knew that we bathed in
this spring, they could come to-morrow and be healed in its water--the
maimed and the halt and blind! To-morrow this water would heal even the
king's daughter who is afflicted with leprosy!"
When they were gone the blind man crept down to the spring and bathed
his face. At the first touch of the healing water his wounds closed and
his sight was restored. With a heart full of gratitude he knelt down and
thanked God for the miracle. Then when morning came he filled a vessel
with the precious water and hurried to the king's palace.
"Tell the king," he said to the guards, "that I have come to heal his
The king admitted him at once to the princess's chamber and said to him:
"If you succeed in healing the princess you shall have her in marriage
and in addition I shall make you heir to my kingdom."
The moment the princess was bathed in the healing water she, too, was
restored to health and at once the proclamation was sent forth that the
princess was recovered and was soon to marry the man who had cured her.
Now when the evil older brother heard who this fortunate man was, he
could scarcely contain himself for rage and envy.
"How did that fool get back his sight?" he asked himself. "What magic
secret did he discover that enabled him to heal the princess of leprosy?
Whatever it was he got it under the fir tree for where else could he
have got it? I've a good mind to go to the fir tree myself to-night and
see what happens."
The more he thought about it the surer he became that if he went to the
fir tree in exactly the same condition as his brother he, too, would
have some wonderful good fortune. So when night came he seated himself
under the tree, gouged out his eyes with a knife, and then waited to see
what would happen. At midnight he heard the Vilas at the spring but
their voices were not sweet but shrill and angry.
"Sisters," they cried to each other, "have you heard? The princess is
healed of leprosy and it was with the water of this, our spring! Who has
spied on us?"
"While we were talking last night," said one, "some man may have been
hiding under the fir tree."
"Let us see if there is any one there to-night!" cried another.
With that they all rushed to the fir tree and took the man they found
sitting there and in a fury tore him to pieces as though he were a bit
of old cloth. So that was the end of the wicked older brother. And you
will notice that in his hour of need his friend, the Devil, was not on
hand to help him.
So after all it was the younger brother who finally inherited all his
father's wealth. In addition he married the princess and was made heir
to the kingdom. So you see Good is stronger than Evil in this world.
LORD AND MASTER
The Story of the Man Who Understood the Language of the Animals
There was once a young shepherd, an honest industrious fellow, who
passed most of his time in the hills looking after his master's flocks.
One afternoon he happened upon a bush which some gipsies had set a-fire.
As he stopped to watch it he heard a strange hissing, whistling sound.
He went as close as he could and in the center of the bush which the
flames had not yet reached he saw a snake. It was writhing and trembling
in fear.
"Help me, brother!" the snake said. "Help me and I will reward you
richly! I swear I will!"
The shepherd put the end of his crook over the flames and the snake
crawled up the crook, up the shepherd's arm, and wound itself about his
neck.
It was now the shepherd's turn to be frightened.
"What! Will you kill me as a reward for my kindness?"
"Nay," the snake said. "Do not be afraid. I will not injure you. Do as I
tell you and you will have nothing to regret. My father is the Tsar of
the Snakes. Take me to him and he will reward you for rescuing me."
"But I can't leave my flocks," the shepherd said.
"Have no fear about your flocks. Nothing will happen to them in your
absence."
"But I don't know where your father, the Tsar of the Snakes, lives," the
shepherd protested.
"I'll show you," the snake said. "I'll point out the direction with my
tail."
So in spite of his misgivings the shepherd at last agreed to the snake's
suggestion and, leaving his sheep in God's care, started up the
mountainside in the direction which the snake pointed out with his tail.
They reached finally a sort of pocket in the hills which was sandy and
rocky and exposed to the full force of the sun. The snake directed the
shepherd to the entrance of a cave which had a huge door composed
entirely of living snakes closely wound together. The shepherd's snake
said something in his breathy whistling voice and the door pulled itself
apart and allowed the shepherd to enter the cave.
"Now," whispered the snake, "when my father asks you what you want, tell
him you want the gift of understanding the language of the animals. He
will try to give you something else but don't you accept anything
else."
The Tsar of the Snakes was a huge creature clothed in a gorgeous skin of
red and yellow and black. They found him reclining on a golden table
with a crown of precious jewels on his head.
"My son!" he cried, when he saw the snake that was still wound about the
shepherd's neck, "where have you been? We have been grieving for you
thinking you had met some misfortune."
"But for this shepherd, my father," the snake said, "I should have been
burned to death. He rescued me."
Then he told the Tsar of the Snakes the whole story. The Tsar of the
Snakes listened carefully and when the Snake Prince was finished he
turned to the shepherd and said:
"Sir, I am deeply indebted to you for saving my son's life. Ask of me
anything I can grant and it is yours."
"Give me then," the shepherd said, "the gift of understanding the
language of the animals."
"Not that!" the Tsar of the Snakes cried. "It is too dangerous a gift!
If ever you confessed to some other human being that you had this gift
and repeated what some animal said you would die that instant. Ask
something else--anything else!"
"No," the shepherd insisted. "Give me that or nothing!"
When the Tsar of the Snakes saw that the shepherd was not to be
dissuaded, he said:
"Very well, then. What must be, must be. Come now very close to me and
put your mouth against my mouth. Do you breathe three times into my
mouth and I shall breathe three times into your mouth. Then you will
understand the language of the animals."
So the shepherd put his mouth close to the mouth of the Tsar of the
Snakes and breathed into it three times. Then the Tsar of the Snakes
breathed into the shepherd's mouth three times.
"Now you will understand the language of all animals," the Tsar of the
Snakes said. "It is a dangerous gift but if you remember my warning it
may bring you great prosperity. Farewell."
So the shepherd went back to his flocks and lay down under a fir tree to
rest. Presently he wondered whether he hadn't been asleep and dreamed
about the burning bush and the snake and the Tsar of the Snakes.
"It can't be real!" he said to himself. "How can I or any man understand
the language of the animals!"
[Illustration: The Tsar of the Snakes Listened Carefully]
Just then two ravens alighted on the tree above his head.
"Caw! Caw!" said one of them. "Wouldn't that shepherd be surprised if he
knew he was lying on some buried treasure!"
"Caw! Caw!" laughed the other. "He'll never know for he's only one of
those poor stupid human beings who can't understand a word we say!"
The ravens flew off and the shepherd sat up and rubbed his eyes to make
sure he was awake.
"Am I dreaming again?" he asked himself, "or did I really understand
them? Well, I'll soon find out. To-morrow I'll bring a spade and then if
there's any treasure buried under this tree I won't be long in digging
it up."
He marked the spot where he had been lying when the ravens spoke and the
next day came back and dug. Three feet below the surface his spade hit
something that proved to be a big iron pot chock-full of golden ducats.
He carried the treasure to his master and his master was so pleased at
his honesty that he gave him half of it.
So now the shepherd was able to set up in life for himself. He bought a
farm and married and "settled down" as the saying is. The years went by
and he grew prosperous and rich.
One Christmas Eve he said to his wife:
"I'm thinking, wife, of my youth when I was a shepherd and how lonely it
was at times like this when other folk were at home seated about the
fire and making merry. Let us give our shepherds out on the hills a
surprise to-night. We can take them meats and wine and other food and
then I'll go out and guard the sheep while you serve them a fine
Christmas supper."
His wife agreed and they mounted their horses and rode out to the hills
taking with them great hampers of food and wine. The wife entertained
the shepherds in their hut with a big jolly supper and the master stayed
outside all night with the dogs guarding the sheep.
At midnight some wolves came prowling around the flocks.
"See here," they said to the dogs, "if you let us in we'll kill the
sheep and then we'll divide the carcasses with you."
The dogs for the most part were young and thoughtless and ready enough
to fall in with the wolves' suggestion. But there was one old sheepdog
that nothing could tempt.
"I've only a few teeth left!" he growled, "but those few are still
sound and let any wolf come a step nearer and I'll tear him to pieces!"
All night long that one old sheepdog stood on guard faithful to duty.
In the morning the master ordered the shepherds to kill the young dogs
and train in new ones.
The shepherds were surprised.
"The master's a clever one!" they told each other. "Just one night and
he found out how worthless those young dogs were!"
As the farmer and his wife were riding home, the farmer's horse ran on
ahead.
"Not so fast!" begged the mare that the wife was riding. "Have pity on
me and go more slowly. You have only the master to carry while I'm all
laden down with hampers and empty jugs and I don't know what and with a
mistress that's twice as big as she was a few months ago!"
The farmer when he heard the mare's complaint burst out laughing.
"What are you laughing at?" his wife asked sharply.
"Nothing," the farmer said.
"You're laughing at me!" the wife declared, "I know you are, just
because I'm so big that I'm awkward in the saddle!"
"No, my dear, I'm not laughing at you, truly I'm not."
"You are! I know you are and I don't think it's kind of you, either!"
And the wife burst into tears.
"Now, my dear," the husband said, soothingly, "be sensible and believe
me when I tell you I was not laughing at you."
"Then what were you laughing at?"
"I can't tell you because if I did tell you then I should die the next
moment."
"Die the next moment!" the wife said. "Stuff and nonsense! It must be a
strange thing indeed if a man can't tell his own wife for fear he'll die
the next moment!"
The more she thought about it the more enraged she became and also the
more curious.
"If you really loved me, you'd tell me!" she wept.
All the way home she kept on worrying her husband and nagging at him
until at last in utter exhaustion he said:
"Peace, woman, peace, and I'll tell you! But first let me have my coffin
made for as I've warned you I shall die the moment I've spoken."
So he had the village carpenter build him a coffin and when it was
ready he stood it up on end against the house and got inside of it.
The news of what was about to happen spread among the animals and the
faithful old sheepdog hurried down from the hills to be with his master
at the end. He lay down at the foot of the coffin and howled.
"I've one faithful friend!" the farmer said. "Wife, give the poor dog
some bread before I tell you my secret and die."
The woman threw the old dog a hunk of bread but the dog refused it and
kept on howling.
The rooster from the barnyard came running up and began gobbling down
the bread with great gusto.
"You shameless animal!" the dog said sternly. "Here's the poor master
about to die on account of that foolish inquisitive wife of his and yet
you have so little feeling that you're delighted at the chance to gorge
yourself with food!"
The rooster clucked scornfully.
"See here, old dog, I can't waste any sympathy on that master of ours!
Any man who allows his wife to bully him deserves whatever he gets! Look
at me!" The rooster puffed out his chest and gave a loud:
"Cock-a-doodle-do! I've got fifty wives but do they bully me? They do
not! Whenever I find a nice fat worm or a grain of corn I set up an
awful noise and gather them all around me. Then I eat it while they
stand there and admire me! No, no, old dog, I have no patience with the
master! He has only one wife and he doesn't know how to rule her!"
"The rooster's right!" thought the farmer.
With that he jumped out of the coffin, picked up a stick, and gave his
wife a sound beating.
"So you'd kill your husband just to satisfy your curiosity, would you?"
he shouted angrily. "Very well, then! Take this and this and this! And
if your curiosity is still unsatisfied I'll give you some more!"
"Stop! Stop! Stop!" cried the wife. "Do you want to injure me!"
But the farmer did not stop until he had given her such a whipping that
she never forgot it. When it was over she begged his pardon humbly and
promised never again to ask him anything that he didn't want to tell
"You just mustn't let me be so foolish again!" she said.
"I won't!" the farmer declared.
Then he puffed out his chest and strutted about until you'd have laughed
to see him--he looked so much like the rooster!
THE SILVER TRACKS
The Story of the Poor Man Who Befriended a Beggar
There were once three brothers who lived in the same village. One of
them was very rich. He had houses and fields and barns. He had nothing
to spend his money on for he had no children and his wife was as saving
and hardworking as himself. The second brother was not so rich but he,
too, was prosperous. He had one son and all his thought was to
accumulate money and property in order to leave his son rich. He schemed
and worked and slaved and made his wife do the same.
The third brother was industrious but very poor. He worked early and
late and never took a holiday. He couldn't afford to for he had a wife
and ten children and only by working every hour of the day and often far
into the night could he earn enough to buy food for so large a family.
He was a simple man and a good man and he taught his children that the
most important thing for them to do in life was to love God and be kind
to their fellowmen.
Now it happened that once, when our Lord Christ was on earth testing out
the hearts of men, he came in the guise of a beggar to the village
where the three brothers lived. He came in a brokendown cart driving a
wheezy old horse. It was cold and raining and night was falling.
The Beggar knocked at the door of the richest brother and said:
"I pray you in God's name give shelter for the night to me and my
horse."
"What!" cried the rich man, "do you suppose I have nothing better to do
than give shelter to such as you! Be off with you or I'll call my men
and have them give you the beating you deserve!"
The Beggar left without another word and went to the house of the next
brother. He was civil at least to the Beggar and pretended that he was
sorry to refuse him.
"I'd accommodate you if I could," he said, "but the truth is I can't. My
house isn't as big as it looks and I have many people dependent on me.
Just go on a little farther and I'm sure you'll find some one who will
take you in."
The Beggar turned his horse's head and went to the tiny little house
where the poor brother lived with his big family. He knocked on the door
and begged for shelter.
"Come in, brother," said the Poor Man. "We're pretty crowded here but
we'll find a place for you."
"And my horse," the Beggar said; "I'm afraid to leave him out in the
rain and cold."
"We'll stable him with my donkey," the Poor Man said. "Do you come in
here by the fire and dry off and I'll see to the horse."
The Poor Man pulled out his own cart until it was exposed to the rain in
order to make a dry place in the shed for the Beggar's cart. Then he led
the Beggar's gaunt horse into his tiny stable and fed him for the night
out of his own slender store of oats and hay.
He and his family shared their evening meal with the Beggar and then
made up for him a bed of straw near the fire where he was able to pass
the night comfortably and warmly.
The next morning as he was leaving he said to the Poor Man:
"You must come sometime to my house and visit me and let me return the
hospitality you have shown me."
"Where do you live?" the Poor Man asked.
"You can always find me," the Beggar said, "by following the tracks of
my cart. You will know them because they are broader than the tracks of
any other cart. You will come, won't you?"
"Yes," the Poor Man promised, "I will if ever I have time."
They bade each other good-by and the Beggar drove slowly off. Then the
Poor Man went to the shed to get his own cart and the first thing he saw
were two large silver bolts lying on the ground.
"They must have fallen from the Beggar's cart!" he thought to himself
and he ran out to the road to see whether the Beggar were still in
sight. But he and the cart had disappeared.
"I hope he has no accident on account of those bolts!" the Poor Man
When he went to the stable to get his donkey he found four golden
horse-shoes where the Beggar's horse had been standing.
"Four golden horse-shoes!" he exclaimed. "I ought to return them and the
silver bolts at once! But I can't to-day, I'm too busy. Well, I'll hide
them safely away and some afternoon when I have a few hours to spare
I'll follow the tracks of the cart to the Beggar's house."
That afternoon he met his two rich brothers and told them about the
Beggar.
"Silver bolts!" cried one.
"Golden horse-shoes!" cried the other. "Take us home with you and let us
see them!"
So they went home with the Poor Man and saw for themselves the silver
bolts and the golden horse-shoes.
"Brothers," the Poor Man said, "if either of you have time I wish you'd
take these things and return them to the Beggar."
They both said, no, no, they hadn't time, but they would like to know
where the Beggar lived.
"He said I could always find him," the Poor Man said, "by following the
tracks of his cart."
"The tracks of his cart!" echoed the other two. "Show us the tracks of
his cart!"
They went to the shed where the cart had been and followed the tracks
out to the road. Even on the road they were easy to see for besides
being wider than any other cart tracks they shone white like glistening
"H'm! H'm!" murmured the two rich brothers.
"You don't think either of you have time to follow them to the Beggar's
house?" the Poor Man said.
"No! Of course not! Of course not!" they both answered.
But in his heart each had already decided to go at once and see for
himself what kind of a Beggar this was who had silver bolts in his cart
and golden shoes on his horse.
The oldest brother went the very next day driving a new wagon and a fine
horse. The silver tracks led through woods and fields and over hills.
They came at last to a river which was spanned by a wooden bridge. It
was cunningly constructed of timbers beautifully hewn. The rich man had
never seen such wood used on a bridge.
By the roadside beyond the bridge there was a pigsty with one trough
full of corn and another full of water. There were two sows in the sty
and they were fighting each other and tearing at each other and paying
no attention whatever to all the good food in the trough.
A little farther on there was another river and over it another
wonderful bridge, this one made entirely of stone.
Beyond it the rich man came to a meadow where there was a hayrick around
which two angry bulls were chasing each other and goring each other
until the blood spurted.
"I wonder some one doesn't stop them!" the rich man thought to himself.
The next river had an iron bridge, more beautiful than the rich man had
ever supposed an iron bridge could be.
Beyond the iron bridge there was a field and a bush and two angry rams
that were chasing each other around the bush and fighting. Their horns
cracked as they met and their hides were torn and bleeding where they
had gored each other.
"I never saw so many angry fighting animals!" the rich man thought to
The next bridge glowed in the sun like the embers of a fire for it was
built entirely of shining copper--copper rivets, copper plates, copper
beams, nothing but copper.
The silver tracks led over the copper bridge into a broad valley. By the
roadside there was a high crossbar from which depended heavy cuts of
meat--lamb and pork and veal. Two large bitch dogs were jumping at the
meat and then snarling and snapping at each other.
The next bridge was the loveliest of them all for it was built of white
gleaming silver.
The rich man climbed down from his wagon and examined it closely.
"It would be worth a man's while to carry home a piece of this bridge!"
he muttered to himself.
He tried the rivets, he shook the railing. At last he found four loose
bolts which he was able to pull out. The four together were so heavy
that he was scarcely able to lift them. He looked cautiously about and
when he saw that no one was looking, he slipped them one by one into the
bottom of his wagon and covered them with straw. Then he turned his
horse's head and drove home as fast as he could. It was midnight when he
got there and nobody about to spy on him as he hid the silver bolts in
the hay.
The next day when he went out alone to gloat over his treasure he found
instead of four heavy silver bolts four pieces of wood!
So that's what the rich brother got for following the silver tracks.
A day or two later without saying a word to any one, the second brother
decided that he would follow the silver tracks and have a look at the
strange Beggar whose cart had silver bolts and whose wheezy horse had
golden shoes.
"Perhaps if I keep my wits about me I'll be able to pick up a few golden
horse-shoes. Not many boys inherit golden horse-shoes from their
fathers!"
[Illustration: The Beggar's Garden]
Well, the second brother went over exactly the same route and saw
exactly the same things. He crossed all those wonderful bridges that his
brother had crossed--the wooden bridge, the stone bridge, the iron
bridge, the copper bridge, the silver bridge, and he saw all those
angry animals still trying to gore each other to death.
He didn't stop at the silver bridge for he thought to himself:
"Perhaps the next bridge will be golden and if it is I may be able to
break off a piece of it!"
Beyond the silver bridge was another broad valley and the second brother
saw many strange sights as he drove through. There was a man standing
alone in a field and trying to beat off a flock of ravens that were
swooping down and pecking at his eyes. Near him was an old man with
snow-white hair who was making loud outcries to heaven praying to be
delivered from the two oxen who were munching at his white hair as
though it were so much hay. They ate great wisps of it and the more they
ate the more grew out.
There was an apple-tree heavily laden with ripe fruit and a hungry man
forever reaching up and plucking an apple. The apples were apples of
Sodom and always as the hungry man raised each new one to his mouth it
turned to ashes.
In another place a thirsty man was reaching with a dipper into a well
and always, just as he was about to scoop up some water, the well moved
away from under the dipper.
"What a strange country this is!" thought the second brother as he drove
At last he reached the next bridge and sure enough it was shining gold!
Every part of it--bolts and beams and pillars, all were gold. In great
excitement the second brother climbed down from his wagon and began
pulling and wrenching at various parts of the bridge hoping to find some
loose pieces which he could break off. At last he succeeded in pulling
out four long bolts which were so heavy he could scarcely lift them.
After looking about in all directions to make sure that no one saw him,
he put them into his wagon and covered them up with straw. Then he drove
homewards as fast as he could.
"Ha! Ha!" he chuckled as he hid the golden bolts in the barn. "My son
will now be a richer man than my brother!"
He could scarcely sleep with thinking of his golden treasure and at the
first light of morning he slipped out to the barn. Imagine his rage when
he found in the straw four bolts of wood!
So that was all the second brother got for following the silver tracks.
Well, years went by and the Poor Man worked day after day and all day
and often far into the night. Some of his children died and the rest
grew up and went out into the world and married and made homes of their
own. Then at last his good wife died and the time came when the Poor Man
was old and all alone in the world.
One night as he sat on his doorstep thinking of his wife and of his
children when they were little and of all the years he had worked for
them to keep them fed and clothed, he happened to remember the Beggar
and the promise he had made to visit him sometime.
"And to think of all the years I've kept his golden horse-shoes and his
silver bolts! Well, he'll forgive me, I know," thought the Poor Man,
"for he'll understand that I've always been too busy up to this time
ever to follow the tracks of his cart. I wonder are they still there."
He went out to the roadside and peered down and how it happened I don't
know, but to his dim eyes at least there were the silver tracks as clear
as ever.
"Good!" cried the Poor Man. "To-morrow morning bright and early I'll
hitch up the donkey and visit my old friend, the Beggar!"
So the next day he took out the silver bolts and the golden horse-shoes
from the place where he had kept them hidden all these years and he put
them in a bag. Then he hitched his old donkey to his old cart and
started out to follow the silver tracks to the Beggar's home.
Well, he saw just exactly the same things that his brothers had seen
those many years before: all those terrible fighting animals and all
those unfortunate men.
"I'll have to remember and ask the Beggar what ails all these
creatures," he thought to himself.
Like his brothers he passed over the wooden bridge and the stone bridge
and the iron bridge and the copper bridge and the silver bridge and even
the golden bridge. Beyond the golden bridge he came to a Garden that was
surrounded by a high wall of diamonds and rubies and sapphires and all
kinds of precious stones that blazed as brightly as the sun itself. The
silver tracks turned in at the garden gate which was locked.
The poor man climbed down from his cart, unhitched the donkey, and set
him out to graze on the tender grass that grew by the wayside.
Then he took the bag that held the golden horse-shoes and the silver
bolts and he went to the garden gate. It was a very wonderful gate of
beaten gold set with precious stones. For a moment the Poor Man wondered
if he dare knock at so rich a gate, then he remembered that his friend
the Beggar was inside and he knew that he would be made welcome.
It was the Beggar himself who opened the gate. When he saw the Poor Man
he smiled and held out his hands and said:
"Welcome, dear friend! I have been waiting for you all these years! Come
in and I will show you my Garden."
So the Poor Man went inside. And first of all he gave the Beggar his
golden horse-shoes and his silver bolts.
"Forgive me," he said, "for keeping them so long, but I've never had
time until now to return them."
The Beggar smiled.
"I knew, dear friend, that they were safe with you and that you would
bring them some day."
Then the Beggar put his arm over the Poor Man's shoulder and led him
through the Garden showing him the wonderful golden fruits and beautiful
flowers. They sat them down beside a fountain of crystal water and while
they listened to the songs of glorious birds they talked together and
the Poor Man asked about the strange things he had seen along the road.
"All those animals," the Beggar said, "were once human beings who
instead of fearing God and being kind to their fellowmen passed all
their time fighting and cheating and cursing. The two sows were two
sisters-in-law who hated each other bitterly. The two bulls and the two
rams were neighbors who fought for years and years over the boundary
lines of their farms and now they keep on fighting through eternity. The
two bitches were two sisters who fought until they died over the
inheritance left them by their father. The old man whose hair the oxen
eat was a farmer who always pastured his cattle on his neighbors'
fields. Now he has his reward. The man at whose eyes the ravens peck was
an ungrateful son who mistreated his parents. The man with the awful
thirst that can never be quenched was a drunkard, and the one at whose
lips the apples turn to ashes was a glutton."
So they talked on together, the Poor Man and the Beggar, until it was
late afternoon and the Beggar said:
"And now, dear friend, you will sup with me as I once supped with you."
"Thank you," the Poor Man said, "I will. But let me first go out and see
how my donkey is."
"Very well," the Beggar said, "go. But be sure to come back for I shall
be waiting for you."
So the Poor Man went out the garden gate and looked for his donkey. But
the donkey was gone.
"He must have started home," the Poor Man thought. "I'll hurry and
overtake him."
So he started back afoot the way he had come. He went on and on but saw
no donkey. He crossed the golden bridge and the silver bridge and the
copper bridge and the iron bridge and the stone bridge and last of all
the wooden bridge, but still there was no donkey.
"He must have got all the way home," he thought.
When the Poor Man reached his native village things looked different.
Houses that he remembered had disappeared and others had taken their
places. He couldn't find his own little house at all. He asked the
people he met and they knew nothing about it. And they knew nothing
about him, either, not even his name. And nobody even knew about his
sons. At last he did meet one old man who remembered the family name and
who told him that many years before the last of the sons had gone to
another village to live.
"There's no place here for me," the Poor Man thought. "I better go back
to my friend the Beggar and stay with him. No one else wants me."
So once again he followed the silver tracks all that long way over all
those bridges and when at last he reached the garden gate he was very
tired, for he was old and feeble now. It was all he could do to give one
faint little knock. But the Beggar heard him and came running to let
him in. And when he saw him, how tired he was and how feeble, he put his
arm around him and helped him into the Garden and he said:
"You shall stay with me now forever and we shall be very happy
together."
And the Poor Man when he looked in the Beggar's face to thank him saw
that he was not a beggar at all but the Blessed Christ Himself. And then
he knew that he was in the Garden of Paradise.
SLEEPING BEAUTY IN THE WOOD.
Once there was a royal couple who grieved excessively because they had
no children. When at last, after long waiting, the queen presented her
husband with a little daughter, his majesty showed his joy by giving a
christening feast, so grand that the like of it was never known. He
invited all the fairies in the land--there were seven altogether--to
stand godmothers to the little princess; hoping that each might bestow
on her some good gift, as was the custom of good fairies in those
After the ceremony, all the guests returned to the palace, where there
was set before each fairy-godmother a magnificent covered dish, with
an embroidered table-napkin, and a knife and fork of pure gold,
studded with diamonds and rubies. But alas! as they placed themselves
at table, there entered an old fairy who had never been invited,
because more than fifty years since she had left the king's dominion
on a tour of pleasure, and had not been heard of until this day. His
majesty, much troubled, desired a cover to be placed for her, but it
was of common delf, for he had ordered from his jeweller only seven
gold dishes for the seven fairies aforesaid. The elderly fairy thought
herself neglected, and muttered angry menaces, which were overheard by
one of the younger fairies, who chanced to sit beside her. This good
godmother, afraid of harm to the pretty baby, hastened to hide herself
behind the tapestry in the hall. She did this, because she wished all
the others to speak first--so that if any ill gift were bestowed on
the child, she might be able to counteract it.
The six now offered their good wishes--which, unlike most wishes, were
sure to come true. The fortunate little princess was to grow up the
fairest woman in the world; to have a temper sweet as an angel; to be
perfectly graceful and gracious; to sing like a nightingale; to dance
like a leaf on a tree; and to possess every accomplishment under the
sun. Then the old fairy's turn came. Shaking her head spitefully, she
uttered the wish that when the baby grew up into a young lady, and
learned to spin, she might prick her finger with the spindle and die
of the wound.
At this terrible prophecy all the guests shuddered; and some of the
more tender-hearted began to weep. The lately happy parents were
almost out of their wits with grief. Upon which the wise young fairy
appeared from behind the tapestry, saying cheerfully "Your majesties
may comfort yourselves; the princess shall not die. I have no power
to alter the ill-fortune just wished her by my ancient sister--her
finger must be pierced; and she shall then sink, not into the sleep of
death, but into a sleep that will last a hundred years. After that
time is ended, the son of a king will find her, awaken her, and marry
Immediately all the fairies vanished.
The king, in the hope of avoiding his daughter's doom, issued an
edict, forbidding all persons to spin, and even to have
spinning-wheels in their houses, on pain of instant death. But it was
in vain. One day, when she was just fifteen years of age, the king and
queen left their daughter alone in one of their castles, when,
wandering about at her will, she came to an ancient donjon tower,
climbed to the top of it, and there found a very old woman--so old and
deaf that she had never heard of the king's edict--busy with her
wheel.
"What are you doing, good old woman?" said the princess.
"I'm spinning, my pretty child."
"Ah, how charming! Let me try if I can spin also."
She had no sooner taken up the spindle than, being lively and
obstinate, she handled it so awkwardly and carelessly that the point
pierced her finger. Though it was so small a wound, she fainted away
at once, and dropped silently down on the floor. The poor frightened
old woman called for help; shortly came the ladies in waiting, who
tried every means to restore their young mistress, but all their care
was useless. She lay, beautiful as an angel, the colour still
lingering in her lips and cheeks; her fair bosom softly stirred with
her breath: only her eyes were fast closed. When the king her father
and the queen her mother beheld her thus, they knew regret was
idle--all had happened as the cruel fairy meant. But they also knew
that their daughter would not sleep for ever, though after one hundred
years it was not likely they would either of them behold her
awakening. Until that happy hour should arrive, they determined to
leave her in repose. They sent away all the physicians and attendants,
and themselves sorrowfully laid her upon a bed of embroidery, in the
most elegant apartment of the palace. There she slept and looked like
a sleeping angel still.
When this misfortune happened, the kindly young fairy who had saved
the princess by changing her sleep of death into this sleep of a
hundred years, was twelve thousand leagues away in the kingdom of
Mataquin. But being informed of everything, she arrived speedily, in a
chariot of fire drawn by dragons. The king was somewhat startled by
the sight, but nevertheless went to the door of his palace, and, with
a mournful countenance, presented her his hand to descend.
The fairy condoled with his majesty, and approved of all he had done.
Then, being a fairy of great common sense and foresight, she suggested
that the princess, awakening after a hundred years in this ancient
castle, might be a good deal embarrassed, especially with a young
prince by her side, to find herself alone. Accordingly, without asking
any one's leave, she touched with her magic wand the entire population
of the palace--except the king and queen; governesses, ladies of
honour, waiting-maids, gentlemen ushers, cooks, kitchen-girls, pages,
footmen--down to the horses that were in the stables, and the grooms
that attended them, she touched each and all. Nay, with kind
consideration for the feelings of the princess, she even touched the
little fat lap-dog, Puffy, who had laid himself down beside his
mistress on her splendid bed. He, like all the rest, fell fast asleep
in a moment. The very spits that were before the kitchen-fire ceased
turning, and the fire itself went out, and everything became as silent
as if it were the middle of the night, or as if the palace were a
palace of the dead.
The king and queen--having kissed their daughter and wept over her a
little, but not much, she looked so sweet and content--departed from
the castle, giving orders that it was to be approached no more. The
command was unnecessary; for in one quarter of an hour there sprung up
around it a wood so thick and thorny that neither beasts nor men could
attempt to penetrate there. Above this dense mass of forest could only
be perceived the top of the high tower where the lovely princess
slept.
A great many changes happen in a hundred years. The king, who never
had a second child, died, and his throne passed into another royal
family. So entirely was the story of the poor princess forgotten, that
when the reigning king's son, being one day out hunting and stopped in
the chase by this formidable wood, inquired what wood it was and what
were those towers which he saw appearing out of the midst of it, no
one could answer him. At length an old peasant was found who
remembered having heard his grandfather say to his father, that in
this tower was a princess, beautiful as the day, who was doomed to
sleep there for one hundred years, until awakened by a king's son, her
destined bridegroom.
At this, the young prince, who had the spirit of a hero, determined to
find out the truth for himself. Spurred on by both generosity and
curiosity, he leaped from his horse and began to force his way through
the thick wood. To his amazement the stiff branches all gave way, and
the ugly thorns sheathed themselves of their own accord, and the
brambles buried themselves in the earth to let him pass. This done,
they closed behind him, allowing none of his suite to follow: but,
ardent and young, he went boldly on alone. The first thing he saw was
enough to smite him with fear. Bodies of men and horses lay extended
on the ground; but the men had faces, not death-white, but red as
peonies, and beside them were glasses half filled with wine, showing
that they had gone to sleep drinking. Next he entered a large court,
paved with marble, where stood rows of guards presenting arms, but
motionless as if cut out of stone; then he passed through many
chambers where gentlemen and ladies, all in the costume of the past
century, slept at their ease, some standing, some sitting. The pages
were lurking in corners, the ladies of honour were stooping over their
embroidery frames, or listening apparently with polite attention to
the gentlemen of the court, but all were as silent as statues and as
immoveable. Their clothes, strange to say, were fresh and new as ever:
and not a particle of dust or spider-web had gathered over the
furniture, though it had not known a broom for a hundred years.
Finally the astonished prince came to an inner chamber, where was the
fairest sight his eyes had ever beheld.
A young girl of wonderful beauty lay asleep on an embroidered bed, and
she looked as if she had only just closed her eyes. Trembling, the
prince approached and knelt beside her. Some say he kissed her, but as
nobody saw it, and she never told, we cannot be quite sure of the
fact. However, as the end of the enchantment had come, the princess
awakened at once, and looking at him with eyes of the tenderest
regard, said drowsily, "Is it you, my prince? I have waited for you
very long."
Charmed with these words, and still more with the tone in which they
were uttered, the prince assured her that he loved her more than his
life. Nevertheless, he was the most embarrassed of the two; for,
thanks to the kind fairy, the princess had plenty of time to dream of
him during her century of slumber, while he had never even heard of
her till an hour before. For a long time did they sit conversing, and
yet had not said half enough. Their only interruption was the little
dog Puffy, who had awakened with his mistress, and now began to be
exceedingly jealous that the princess did not notice him as much as
she was wont to do.
Meantime all the attendants, whose enchantment was also broken, not
being in love, were ready to die of hunger after their fast of a
hundred years. A lady of honour ventured to intimate that dinner was
served; whereupon the prince handed his beloved princess at once to
the great hall. She did not wait to dress for dinner, being already
perfectly and magnificently attired, though in a fashion somewhat out
of date. However, her lover had the politeness not to notice this, nor
to remind her that she was dressed exactly like her royal grandmother,
whose portrait still hung on the palace walls.
During the banquet a concert took place by the attendant musicians,
and considering they had not touched their instruments for a century
they played extremely well. They ended with a wedding march: for that
very evening the marriage of the prince and princess was celebrated,
and though the bride was nearly one hundred years older than the
bridegroom, it is remarkable that the fact would never have been
discovered by any one unacquainted therewith.
After a few days they went together out of the castle and enchanted
wood, both of which immediately vanished, and were never more beheld
by mortal eyes. The princess was restored to her ancestral kingdom,
but it was not generally declared who she was, as during a hundred
years people had grown so very much cleverer that nobody then living
would ever have believed the story. So nothing was explained, and
nobody presumed to ask any questions about her, for ought not a prince
be able to marry whomsoever he pleases?
Nor--whether or not the day of fairies was over--did the princess ever
see anything further of her seven godmothers. She lived a long and
happy life, like any other ordinary woman, and died at length,
beloved, regretted, but, the prince being already no more, perfectly
contented.
HOP-O'-MY-THUMB.
There once lived in a village a faggot-maker and his wife, who had
seven children, all boys; the eldest was no more than ten years old,
and the youngest was only seven.
It was odd enough, to be sure, that they should have so many children
in such a short time; but the truth is, the wife always brought him
two and once three at a time. This made him very poor, for not one of
these boys was old enough to get a living, and what was still worse,
the youngest was a puny little fellow who hardly ever spoke a word.
Now this, indeed, was a mark of his good sense, but it made his father
and mother suppose him to be silly, and they thought that at last he
would turn out quite a fool. This boy was the least size ever seen;
for when he was born he was no bigger than a man's thumb, which made
him be christened by the name of Hop-o'-my-thumb. The poor child was
the drudge of the whole house and always bore the blame of everything
that was done wrong. For all this, Hop-o'-my-thumb was far more clever
than any of his brothers; and though he spoke but little, he heard and
knew more than people thought. It happened just at this time, that for
want of rain the fields had grown but half as much corn and potatoes
as they used to grow; so that the faggot-maker and his wife could not
give the boys the food they had before, which was always either bread
or potatoes.
After the father and mother had grieved some time, they thought that
as they could contrive no other way to live, they must somehow get rid
of their children. One night when the boys were gone to bed, and the
faggot-maker and his wife were sitting over a few lighted sticks, to
warm themselves, the husband sighed deeply, and said, "You see, my
dear, we cannot maintain our children any longer, and to see them die
of hunger before my eyes is what I could never bear. I will,
therefore, to-morrow morning take them to the forest, and leave them
in the thickest part of it, so that they will not be able to find
their way back: this will be very easy; for while they amuse
themselves with tying up the faggots, we need only slip away when they
are looking some other way."
"Ah! husband," cried the poor wife, "you cannot, no, you never can
consent to be the death of your own children."
The husband in vain told her to think how very poor they were.
The wife replied "that this was true, to be sure; but if she was poor,
she was still their mother;" and then she cried as if her heart would
break. At last she thought how shocking it would be to see them
starved to death before their eyes; so she agreed to what her husband
had said, and then went sobbing to bed.
Hop-o'-my-thumb had been awake all the time; and when he heard his
father talk very seriously, he slipped away from his brothers' side,
and crept under his father's bed, to hear all that was said without
being seen.
When his father and mother had left off talking, he got back to his
own place, and passed the night in thinking what he should do the next
morning.
He rose early, and ran to the river's side, where he filled his
pockets with small white pebbles, and then went back home. In the
morning they all set out, as their father and mother had agreed on;
and Hop-o'-my-thumb did not say a word to any of his brothers about
what he had heard. They came to a forest that was so very thick that
they could not see each other a few yards off. The faggot-maker set to
work cutting down wood; and the children began to gather the twigs, to
make faggots of them.
When the father and mother saw that the young ones were all very busy,
they slipped away without being seen. The children soon found
themselves alone, and began to cry as loud as they could.
Hop-o'-my-thumb let them cry on, for he knew well enough how to lead
them safe home, an he had taken care to drop the white pebbles he had
in his pocket along all the way he had come. He only said to them,
"Never mind it, my lads: father and mother have left us here by
ourselves, but only take care to follow me, and I will lead you back
again."
When they heard this they left off crying, and followed
Hop-o'-my-thumb, who soon brought them to their father's house by the
very same path which they had come along. At first they had not the
courage to go in; but stood at the door to hear what their parents
were talking about. Just as the faggot-maker and his wife had come
home without their children, a great gentleman of the village sent to
pay them two guineas, for work they had done for him, which he had
owed them so long that they never thought of getting a farthing of it.
This money made them quite happy; for the poor creatures were very
hungry, and had no other way of getting anything to eat.
The faggot-maker sent his wife out immediately to buy some meat; and
as it was a long time since she had made a hearty meal, she bought as
much meat as would have been enough for six or eight persons. The
truth was, when she was thinking what would be enough for dinner, she
forgot that her children were not at home; but as soon as she and her
husband had done eating, she cried out, "Alas! where are our poor
children? how they would feast on what we have left! It was all your
fault, husband! I told you we should repent leaving them to starve in
the forest!--Oh mercy! perhaps they have already been eaten by the
hungry wolves!" The poor woman shed plenty of tears: "Alas! alas!"
said she, over and over again, "what is become of my dear children?"
The children, who were all at the door, cried out together, "Here we
are, mother, here we are!"
She flew like lightning to let them in, and kissed every one of them.
The faggot-maker and his wife were charmed at having their children
once more with them, and their joy for this lasted till their money
was all spent; but then they found themselves quite as ill off as
before. So by degrees they again thought of leaving them in the
forest: and that the young ones might not come back a second time,
they said they would take them a great deal farther than they did at
first. They could not talk about this matter so slily but that
Hop-o'-my-thumb found means to hear all that passed between them; but
he cared very little about it, for he thought it would be easy for him
to do just the same as he had done before. But though he got up very
early the next morning to go to the river's side to get the pebbles, a
thing which he had not thought of hindered him; for he found that the
house-door was double-locked. Hop-o'-my-thumb was now quite at a loss
what to do; but soon after this, his mother gave each of the children
a piece of bread for breakfast, and then it came into his head that he
could make his share do as well as the pebbles, by dropping crumbs of
it all the way as he went. So he did not eat his piece, but put it
into his pocket.
It was not long before they all set out, and their parents took care
to lead them into the very thickest and darkest part of the forest.
They then slipped away by a by-path as before, and left the children
by themselves again. All this did not give Hop-o'-my-thumb any
concern, for he thought himself quite sure of getting back by means
of the crumbs that he had dropped by the way; but when he came to look
for them he found that not a crumb was left, for the birds had eaten
them all up.
The poor children were now sadly off, for the further they went the
harder it was for them to get out of the forest. At last night came
on, and the noise of the wind among the trees seemed to them like the
howling of wolves, so that every moment they thought they should be
eaten up. They hardly dared to speak a word, or to move a limb, for
fear. Soon after there came a heavy rain, which wetted them to the
very skin, and made the ground so slippery, that they fell down almost
at every step, and got dirty all over.
Before it was quite dark, Hop-o'-my-thumb climbed up to the top of a
tree, and looked round on all sides to see if he could find any way of
getting help. He saw a small light, like that of a candle, but it was
a very great way off, and beyond the forest. He then came down from
the tree, to try to find the way to it; but he could not see it when
he was on the ground, and he was in the utmost trouble what to do
next. They walked on towards the place where he had seen the light,
and at last reached the end of the forest, and got sight of it again.
They now walked faster; and after being much tired and vexed (for
every time they got into lower ground they lost sight of the light),
came to the house it was in. They knocked at the door, which was
opened by a very good-natured-looking lady, who asked what brought
them there. Hop-o'-my-thumb told her that they were poor children, who
had lost their way in the forest, and begged that she would give them
a bed till morning. When the lady saw that they had such pretty faces,
she began to shed tears and said, "Ah! my poor children, you do not
know what place you are come to. This is the house of an Ogre, who
eats up little boys and girls."
"Alas! madam," replied Hop-o'-my-thumb, who trembled from head to
foot, "what shall we do? If we go back to the forest, we are sure of
being torn to pieces by the wolves; we would rather, therefore, be
eaten by the gentleman: besides, when he sees us, perhaps he may take
pity on us and spare our lives."
The Ogre's wife thought she could contrive to hide them from her
husband till morning; so she let them go in and warm themselves by a
good fire, before which there was a whole sheep roasting for the
Ogre's supper. When they had stood a short time by the fire, there
came a loud knocking at the door: this was the Ogre come home. His
wife hurried the children under the bed, and told them to lie still,
and she then let her husband in.
The Ogre asked if supper were ready, and if the wine were fetched from
the cellar; and then he sat down at the table. The sheep was not quite
done, but he liked it much better half raw. In a minute or two the
Ogre began to snuff to his right and left, and said he smelt child's
flesh.
"It must be this calf which has just been killed," said his wife.
"I smell child's flesh, I tell thee once more," cried the Ogre,
looking all about the room; "I smell child's flesh; there is something
going on that I do not know of."
As soon as he had spoken these words, he rose from his chair and went
towards the bed.
"Ah! madam," said he, "you thought to cheat me, did you? Wretch! thou
art old and tough thyself, or else I would eat thee up too! But come,
come, this is lucky enough; for the brats will make a nice dish for
three Ogres, who are my particular friends, and who are to dine with
me to-morrow."
He then drew them out one by one from under the bed. The poor children
fell on their knees and begged his pardon as humbly as they could; but
this Ogre was the most cruel of all Ogres, and instead of feeling any
pity, he only began to think how sweet and tender their flesh would
be; so he told his wife they would be nice morsels, if she served them
up with plenty of sauce. He then fetched a large knife, and began to
sharpen it on a long whetstone that he held in his left hand; and all
the while he came nearer and nearer to the bed. The Ogre took up one
of the children, and was going to set about cutting him to pieces; but
his wife said to him, "What in the world makes you take the trouble of
killing them to-night? Will it not be time enough to-morrow morning?"
"Hold your prating," replied the Ogre; "they will grow tender by being
kept a little while after they are killed."
"But," said his wife, "you have got so much meat in the house already;
here is a calf, two sheep and half a pig."
"True," said the Ogre, "so give them all a good supper, that they may
not get lean, and then send them to bed."
The good creature was quite glad at this. She gave them plenty for
their supper, but the poor children were so terrified that they could
not eat a bit.
The Ogre sat down to his wine, very much pleased with the thought of
giving his friends such a dainty dish: this made him drink rather more
than common, and he was soon obliged to go to bed himself. Now the
Ogre had seven daughters, who were all very young like Hop-o'-my-thumb
and his brothers. These young Ogresses had fair skins, because they
fed on raw meat like their father; but they had small grey eyes, quite
round, and sunk in their heads, hooked noses, wide mouths, and very
long sharp teeth standing a great way off each other. They were too
young as yet to do much mischief; but they showed that if they lived
to be as old as their father, they would grow quite as cruel as he
was, for they took pleasure already in biting young children, and
sucking their blood. The Ogresses had been put to bed very early that
night; they were all in one bed, which was very large, and every one
of them had a crown of gold on her head. There was another bed of the
same size in the room, and in this the Ogre's wife put the seven
little boys, and then went to bed herself along with her husband.
Now Hop-o'-my-thumb was afraid that the Ogre would wake in the night
and kill him and his brothers while they were asleep. So he got out of
bed in the middle of the night as softly as he could, took off all his
brothers' nightcaps and his own, and crept with them to the bed that
the Ogre's daughters were in: he then took off their crowns, and put
the nightcaps on their heads instead: next he put the crowns on his
brothers' heads and his own, and got into bed again; expecting, after
this, that, if the Ogre should come, he would take him and his
brothers for his own children. Everything turned out as he wished. The
Ogre waked soon after midnight, and began to be very sorry that he had
put off killing the boys till the morning: so he jumped out of bed,
and took hold of his large knife. "Let us see," said he, "what the
young rogues are about, and do the business at once!" He then walked
softly to the room where they all slept, and went up to the bed the
boys were in, who were all asleep except Hop-o'-my-thumb. He touched
their heads one at a time, and feeling the crowns of gold, said to
himself, "Oh, oh! I had like to have made such a mistake. I must have
drunk too much wine last night."
He went next to the bed that his own little Ogresses were in, and when
he felt the nightcaps, he said, "Ah! here you are, my lads:" and so in
a moment he cut the throats of all his daughters.
He was very much pleased when he had done this, and then went back to
his own bed. As soon as Hop-o'-my-thumb heard him snore, he awoke his
brothers, and told them to put on their clothes quickly, and follow
him. They stole down softly into the garden, and then jumped from the
wall into the road: they ran as fast as their legs could carry them,
but were so much afraid all the while, that they hardly knew which way
to take. When the Ogre waked in the morning, he said to his wife,
grinning, "My dear, go and dress the young rogues I saw last night."
The wife was quite surprised at hearing her husband speak so kindly,
and did not dream of the real meaning of his words. She supposed he
wanted her to help them to put on their clothes; so she went upstairs,
and the first thing she saw was her seven daughters with their throats
cut and all over blood. This threw her into a fainting fit. The Ogre
was afraid his wife might be too long in doing what he had set her
about, so he went himself to help her; but he was as much shocked as
she had been at the dreadful sight of his bleeding children. "Ah! what
have I done?" he cried; "but the little rascals shall pay for it, I
warrant them."
He first threw some water on his wife's face; and, as soon as she came
to herself, he said to her: "Bring me quickly my seven-league boots,
that I may go and catch the little vipers."
The Ogre then put on these boots, and set out with all speed. He
strided over many parts of the country, and at last turned into the
very road in which the poor children were. For they had set off
towards the faggot-maker's cottage, which they had almost reached.
They watched the Ogre stepping from mountain to mountain at one step,
and crossing rivers as if they had been tiny brooks. At this
Hop-o'-my-thumb thought a little what was to be done; and spying a
hollow place under a large rock, he made his brothers get into it. He
then crept in himself, but kept his eye fixed on the Ogre, to see what
he would do next.
The Ogre found himself quite weary with the journey he had gone, for
seven-league boots are very tiresome to the person who wears them; so
he now began to think of resting, and happened to sit down on the very
rock where the poor children were hid. As he was so tired, and it was
a very hot day, he fell fast asleep, and soon began to snore so loud,
that the little fellows were terrified.
When Hop-o'-my-thumb saw this he said to his brothers, "Courage, my
lads! never fear! you have nothing to do but to steal away and get
home while the Ogre is fast asleep, and leave me to shift for myself."
The brothers now were very glad to do whatever he told them, and so
they soon came to their father's house. In the mean time
Hop-o'-my-thumb went up to the Ogre softly, pulled off his
seven-league boots very gently, and put them on his own legs: for
though the boots were very large, yet being fairy-boots, they could
make themselves small enough to fit any leg they pleased.
As soon as ever Hop-o'-my-thumb had made sure of the Ogre's
seven-league boots, he went at once to the palace, and offered his
services to carry orders from the king to his army, which was a great
way off, and to bring back the quickest accounts of the battle they
were just at that time fighting with the enemy. In short, he thought
he could be of more use to the king than all his mail coaches, and so
should make his fortune in this manner. He succeeded so well, that in
a short time he made money enough to keep himself, his father, mother,
and six brothers, without the trouble of working, for the rest of
their lives. Having done this, he went back to his father's cottage,
where all the family were delighted to see him again. As the great
fame of his boots had been talked of at court in this time, the king
sent for him, and indeed employed him very often in the greatest
affairs of the state, so that he became one of the richest men in the
kingdom.
And now let us see what became of the wicked Ogre. He slept so soundly
that he never discovered the loss of his boots; but having an evil
conscience and bad dreams, he fell in his sleep from the corner of the
rock where Hop-o'-my-thumb and his brothers had left him, and bruised
himself so much from head to foot, that he could not stir: so he was
forced to stretch himself out at full length, and wait for some one to
come and help him.
Now a good many faggot-makers passed near the place where the Ogre
lay; and, when they heard him groan, they went up to ask him what was
the matter. But the Ogre had eaten such a great number of children in
his lifetime, that he had grown so very big and fat that these men
could not even have carried one of his legs; so they were forced to
leave him there. At last night came on, and then a large serpent came
out of a wood just by, and stung him, so that he died in great pain.
By and by, Hop-o'-my-thumb, who had become the king's first favourite,
heard of the Ogre's death; and the first thing he did was to tell his
majesty all that the good-natured Ogress had done to save the lives of
himself and brothers. The king was so much pleased at what he heard,
that he asked Hop-o'-my-thumb if there was any favour he could bestow
upon her? Hop-o'-my-thumb thanked the king, and desired that the
Ogress might have the noble title of Duchess of Draggletail given to
her; which was no sooner asked than granted. The Ogress then came to
court, and lived very happily for many years, enjoying the vast
fortune she had found in the Ogre's chests. As for Hop-o'-my-thumb, he
every day grew more witty and brave; till at last the king made him
the greatest lord in the kingdom, and set him over all his affairs.
OR,
The Little Glass Slipper.
There was once an honest gentle man who took for his second wife a
lady, the proudest and most disagreeable in the whole country. She had
two daughters exactly like herself in all things. He also had one
little girl, who resembled her dead mother, the best woman in all the
world. Scarcely had the second marriage taken place, than the
stepmother became jealous of the good qualities of the little girl,
who was so great a contrast to her own two daughters. She gave her all
the menial occupations of the house; compelled her to wash the floors
and staircases, to dust the bed-rooms, and clean the grates; and while
her sisters occupied carpeted chambers hung with mirrors, where they
could see themselves from head to foot, this poor little damsel was
sent to sleep in an attic, on an old straw mattress, with only one
chair and not a looking-glass in the room.
She suffered all in silence, not daring to complain to her father, who
was entirely ruled by his new wife. When her daily work was done she
used to sit down in the chimney-corner among the ashes; from which the
two sisters gave her the nick-name of Cinderella. But Cinderella,
however shabbily clad, was handsomer than they were with all their
fine clothes.
It happened that the king's son gave a series of balls, to which were
invited all the rank and fashion of the city, and among the rest the
two elder sisters. They were very proud and happy, and occupied their
whole time in deciding what they should wear; a source of new trouble
to Cinderella, whose duty it was to get up their fine linen and laces,
and who never could please them however much she tried. They talked of
nothing but their clothes.
"I," said the elder, "shall wear my velvet gown and my trimmings of
English lace."
"And I," added the younger, "will have but my ordinary silk petticoat,
but I shall adorn it with an upper skirt of flowered brocade, and
shall put on my diamond tiara, which is a great deal finer than
anything of yours."
Here the elder sister grew angry, and the dispute began to run so
high, that Cinderella, who was known to have excellent taste, was
called upon to decide between them. She gave them the best advice she
could, and gently and submissively offered to dress them herself, and
especially to arrange their hair, an accomplishment in which she
excelled many a noted coiffeur. The important evening came, and she
exercised all her skill to adorn the two young ladies. While she was
combing out the elder's hair, this ill-natured girl said sharply,
"Cinderella, do you not wish you were going to the ball?"
"Ah, madam" (they obliged her always to say madam), "you are only
mocking me; it is not my fortune to have any such pleasure."
"You are right; people would only laugh to see a little cinder-wench
at a ball."
Any other than Cinderella would have dressed the hair all awry, but
she was good, and dressed it perfectly even and smooth, and as
prettily as she could.
The sisters had scarcely eaten for two days, and had broken a dozen
stay-laces a day, in trying to make themselves slender; but to-night
they broke a dozen more, and lost their tempers over and over again
before they had completed their toilette. When at last the happy
moment arrived, Cinderella followed them to the coach; after it had
whirled them away, she sat down by the kitchen fire and cried.
Immediately her godmother, who was a fairy, appeared beside her. "What
are you crying for, my little maid?"
"Oh, I wish--I wish--" Her sobs stopped her.
"You wish to go to the ball; isn't it so?"
Cinderella nodded.
"Well, then, be a good girl, and you shall go. First run into the
garden and fetch me the largest pumpkin you can find."
Cinderella did not comprehend what this had to do with her going to
the ball, but being obedient and obliging, she went. Her godmother
took the pumpkin, and having scooped out all its inside, struck it
with her wand; it became a splendid gilt coach, lined with
rose-coloured satin.
"Now fetch me the mouse-trap out of the pantry, my dear."
Cinderella brought it; it contained six of the fattest, sleekest mice.
The fairy lifted up the wire door, and as each mouse ran out she
struck it and changed it into a beautiful black horse.
"But what shall I do for your coachman, Cinderella?"
Cinderella suggested that she had seen a large black rat in the
rat-trap, and he might do for want of better.
"You are right; go and look again for him."
He was found, and the fairy made him into a most respectable coachman,
with the finest whiskers imaginable. She afterwards took six lizards
from behind the pumpkin frame, and changed them into six footmen, all
in splendid livery, who immediately jumped up behind the carriage, as
if they had been footmen all their days. "Well, Cinderella, now you
can go to the ball."
"What, in these clothes?" said Cinderella piteously, looking down on
her ragged frock.
Her godmother laughed, and touched her also with the wand; at which
her wretched thread-bare jacket became stiff with gold, and sparkling
with jewels; her woollen petticoat lengthened into a gown of sweeping
satin, from underneath which peeped out her little feet, no longer
bare, but covered with silk stockings, and the prettiest glass
slippers in the world. "Now Cinderella, depart; but remember, if you
stay one instant after midnight, your carriage will become a pumpkin,
your coachman a rat, your horses mice, and your footmen lizards; while
you yourself will be the little cinder-wench you were an hour ago."
Cinderella promised without fear, her heart was so full of joy.
Arrived at the palace, the king's son, whom some one, probably the
fairy, had told to await the coming of an uninvited princess whom
nobody knew, was standing at the entrance, ready to receive her. He
offered her his hand, and led her with the utmost courtesy through the
assembled guests, who stood aside to let her pass, whispering to one
another, "Oh, how beautiful she is!" It might have turned the head of
any one but poor Cinderella, who was so used to be despised, that she
took it all as if it were something happening in a dream.
Her triumph was complete; even the old king said to the queen, that
never since her majesty's young days had he seen so charming and
elegant a person. All the court ladies, scanned her eagerly, clothes
and all, determining to have theirs made next day of exactly the same
pattern. The king's son himself led her out to dance, and she danced
so gracefully that he admired her more and more. Indeed, at supper,
which was fortunately early, his admiration quite took away his
appetite. For Cinderella herself, with an involuntary shyness she
sought out her sisters; placed herself beside them and offered them
all sorts of civil attentions, which, coming as they supposed from a
stranger, and so magnificent a lady, almost overwhelmed them with
delight.
While she was talking with them, she heard the clock strike a quarter
to twelve, and making a courteous adieu to the royal family, she
re-entered her carriage, escorted tenderly by the king's son, and
arrived in safety at her own door. There she found her godmother, who
smiled approval; and of whom she begged permission to go to a second
ball, the following night, to which the queen had earnestly invited
While she was talking, the two sisters were heard knocking at the
gate, and the fairy godmother vanished, leaving Cinderella sitting in
the chimney-corner, rubbing her eyes and pretending to be very sleepy.
"Ah," cried the eldest sister maliciously, "it has been the most
delightful ball, and there was present the most beautiful princess I
ever saw, who was so exceedingly polite to us both."
"Was she?" said Cinderella indifferently; "and who might she be?"
"Nobody knows, though everybody would give their eyes to know,
especially the king's son."
"Indeed!" replied Cinderella, a little more interested; "I should like
to see her. Miss Javotte"--that was the elder sister's name--"will you
not let me go to-morrow, and lend me your yellow gown that you wear on
Sundays?"
"What, lend my yellow gown to a cinder-wench! I am not so mad as
that;" at which refusal Cinderella did not complain, for if her sister
really had lent her the gown she would have been considerably
embarrassed.
The next night came, and the two young ladies richly dressed in
different toilettes, went to the ball. Cinderella, more splendidly
attired and beautiful than ever, followed them shortly after. "Now
remember twelve o'clock," was her godmother's parting speech; and she
thought she certainly should. But the prince's attentions to her were
greater even than the first evening, and in the delight of listening
to his pleasant conversation, time slipped by unperceived. While she
was sitting beside him in a lovely alcove, and looking at the moon
from under a bower of orange blossoms, she heard a clock strike the
first stroke of twelve. She started up, and fled away as lightly as a
deer.
Amazed, the prince followed, but could not catch her. Indeed he missed
his lovely princess altogether, and only saw running out of the palace
doors a little dirty lass whom he had never beheld before, and of whom
he certainly would never have taken the least notice, Cinderella
arrived at home breathless and weary, ragged and cold, without
carriage, or footmen, or coachman; the only remnant of her past
magnificence being one of her little glass slippers;--the other she
had dropped in the ball-room as she ran away.
When the two sisters returned they were full of this strange
adventure, how the beautiful lady had appeared at the ball more
beautiful than ever, and enchanted every one who looked at her; and
how as the clock was striking twelve she had suddenly risen up and
fled through the ball-room, disappearing no one knew how or where, and
dropping one of her glass slippers behind her in her flight. How the
king's son had remained inconsolable until he chanced to pick up the
little glass slipper, which he carried away in his pocket, and was
seen to take it out continually, and look at it affectionately, with
the air of a man very much in love; in fact, from his behaviour during
the remainder of the evening, all the court and royal family were
convinced that he had become desperately enamoured of the wearer of
the little glass slipper.
Cinderella listened in silence, turning her face to the kitchen fire,
and perhaps it was that which made her look so rosy, but nobody ever
noticed or admired her at home, so it did not signify, and next
morning she went to her weary work again just as before.
A few days after, the whole city was attracted by the sight of a
herald going round with a little glass slipper in his hand,
publishing, with a flourish of trumpets, that the king's son ordered
this to be fitted on the foot of every lady in the kingdom, and that
he wished to marry the lady whom it fitted best, or to whom it and the
fellow slipper belonged. Princesses, duchesses, countesses, and simple
gentlewomen all tried it on, but being a fairy slipper, it fitted
nobody and beside, nobody could produce its fellow slipper, which lay
all the time safely in the pocket of Cinderella's old linsey gown.
At last the herald came to the house of the two sisters, and though
they well knew neither of themselves was the beautiful lady, they made
every attempt to get their clumsy feet into the glass slipper, but in
"Let me try it on," said Cinderella from the chimney corner.
"What, you?" cried the others, bursting into shouts of laughter; but
Cinderella only smiled, and held out her hand.
Her sisters could not prevent her, since the command was that every
young maiden in the city should try on the slipper, in order that no
chance might be left untried, for the prince was nearly breaking his
heart; and his father and mother were afraid that though a prince, he
would actually die for love of the beautiful unknown lady.
So the herald bade Cinderella sit down on a three-legged stool in the
kitchen, and himself put the slipper on her pretty little foot, which
it fitted exactly; she then drew from her pocket the fellow slipper,
which she also put on, and stood up--for with the touch of the magic
shoes all her dress was changed likewise--no longer the poor despised
cinder-wench, but the beautiful lady whom the king's son loved.
Her sisters recognized her at once. Filled with astonishment, mingled
with no little alarm, they threw themselves at her feet, begging her
pardon for all their former unkindness. She raised and embraced them:
told them she forgave them with all her heart, and only hoped they
would love her always. Then she departed with the herald to the king's
palace, and told her whole story to his majesty and the royal family,
who were not in the least surprised, for everybody believed in
fairies, and everybody longed to have a fairy godmother.
For the young prince, he found her more lovely and loveable than ever,
and insisted upon marrying her immediately. Cinderella never went home
again, but she sent for her two sisters to the palace, and with the
consent of all parties married them shortly after to two rich
gentlemen of the court.
ADVENTURES OF JOHN DIETRICH.
There once lived in Rambin, a town near the Baltic Sea, an honest,
industrious man named James Dietrich. He had several children, all of
a good disposition, especially the youngest, whose name was John. John
Dietrich was a handsome, smart boy, diligent at school, and obedient
at home. His great passion was for hearing stories, and whenever he
met any one who was well stored with such, he never let him go till he
had heard them all.
When John was about eight years old he was sent to spend a summer with
his uncle, a farmer in Rodenkirchen. Here he had to keep cows with
other boys, and they used to drive them to graze about the Nine-hills,
where an old cowherd, one Klas Starkwolt, frequently came to join the
lads, and then they would sit down all together and tell stories.
Consequently Klas became John's best friend, for he knew stories
without end. He could tell all about the Nine-hills, and the
underground folk who inhabited them; how the giants disappeared from
the country, and the dwarfs or little people came in their stead.
These tales John swallowed so eagerly that he thought of nothing else,
and was for ever talking of golden cups, and crowns, and glass shoes,
and pockets full of ducats, and gold rings, and diamond coronets, and
snow-white brides, and the like. Old Klas used often to shake his head
at him and say, "John! John! what are you about? The spade and scythe
will be your sceptre and crown, and your bride will wear a garland of
rosemary and a gown of striped drill."
Still John almost longed to get into the Nine-hills, for Klas had told
him that any one who by luck or cunning should get the cap of one of
the little people might go down with safety, and instead of becoming
their slave, he would be their master. The fairy whose cap he got
would be his servant, and obey all his commands.
Midsummer-eve, when the days are longest and the nights shortest, was
now come. In the village of Rambin old and young kept the holiday, had
all sorts of plays, and told all kinds of stories. John, who knew that
this season was the time for all fairy-people to come abroad, could
now no longer contain himself, but the day after the festival he
slipped away to the Nine-hills, and when it grew dark laid himself
down on the top of the highest of them, which Klas had told him was
the principal dancing-ground of the underground people. John lay there
quite still from ten till twelve at night. At last it struck twelve.
Immediately there was a ringing and a singing in the hills, and then a
whispering and a lisping and a whiz and a buzz all about him, for the
little people were now come out, some whirling round and round in the
dance, and others sporting and tumbling about in the moonshine, and
playing a thousand merry pranks. He felt a secret dread creep over
him at this whispering and buzzing, for he could see nothing of them,
as the caps they wore made them invisible; but he lay quite still,
with his face in the grass and his eyes fast shut, snoring a little
just as if he was asleep. Yet now and then he ventured to open his
eyes a little and peep out, but not the slightest trace of them could
he see, though it was bright moonlight.
It was not long before three of the underground people came jumping up
to where he was lying; but they took no heed of him, and flung their
brown caps up into the air, and caught them from one another. At
length one snatched the cap out of the hand of another and flung it
away. It flew direct and fell upon John's head. He could feel, though
he could not see it; and the moment he did feel it, he caught hold of
it. Starting up, he swung it about for joy, and made the little silver
bell of it tingle, then set it upon his head, and--O wonderful to
relate!--that instant he saw the countless and merry swarm of the
little people.
The three little men came slily up to him, and thought by their
nimbleness to get back the cap, but he held his prize fast, and they
saw clearly that nothing was to be done in this way with him, for in
size and strength John was a giant in comparison of these little
fellows, who hardly reached his knee. The owner of the cap now came up
very humbly to the finder, and begged in as supplicating a tone as if
his life depended upon it, that he would give him back his cap. "No,"
said John, "you sly little rogue, you'll get the cap no more. That's
not the sort of thing: I should be in a nice perplexity if I had not
something of yours; now you have no power over me, but must do what I
please. And I will go down with you, and see how you live below and
you shall be my servant.--Nay, no grumbling, you know you must. And I
know it too, just as well as you do, for Klas Starkwolt told it to me
often and often."
The little man made as if he had not heard or understood one word of
all this; he began all his crying and whining over again, and wept,
and screamed, and howled most piteously for his little cap. But John
cut the matter short by saying to him, "Have done; you are my servant,
and I intend to take a trip with you." So the underground man gave up
the point; especially as he well knew there was no remedy.
John now flung away his old hat, and put on the cap, and set it firmly
on his head, lest it should slip off or fly away, for all his power
lay in it. He lost no time in trying its virtues, but commanded his
new servant to fetch him food and drink. The servant ran away like the
wind, and in a second was there again with bottles of wine, and bread,
and rich fruits. So John ate and drank, and looked on at the sports
and the dancing of the little people, and it pleased him right well,
and he behaved himself stoutly and wisely, as if he was a born master.
When the cock had now crowed for the third time, and the little larks
had made their first flutter in the sky, and the daybreak appeared in
slender white streaks in the east, then there went a whisper, hush,
hush, hush, through the bushes, and flowers, and trees; and the hills
rang again, and opened up, and the little men stole down and
disappeared. John gave close attention to every thing, and found that
it was exactly as he had been told. And behold! on the top of the hill
where they had just been dancing, and which was now full of grass and
flowers, as people see it by day, there rose, of a sudden, a small
glass door. Whosoever wanted to go in stepped upon this; it opened,
and he glided gently in, the glass closing again after him; and when
they had all entered it vanished, and there was no farther trace of it
to be seen. Those who descended through the glass door sank quite
gently into a wide silver tun or barrel, which held them all, and
could easily have harboured a thousand such little people. John and
his man went down also, along with several others, all of whom
screamed out and prayed him not to tread on them, for if his weight
came on them, they were dead men. He was, however, careful, and acted
in a very friendly way towards them. Several barrels of this kind went
up and down after each other, until all were in. They hung by long
silver chains, which were drawn and guided from below.
In his descent John was amazed at the wonderful brilliancy of the
walls between which the tun glided down. They seemed all studded with
pearls and diamonds, glittering and sparkling brightly, while below
him he heard the most beautiful music tinkling at a distance, so that
he did not know what he was about, and from excess of pleasure he fell
fast asleep.
He slept a long time, and when he awoke he found himself in the most
beautiful bed that could be, such as he had never seen in his father's
or any other house. It was also the prettiest little chamber in the
world, and his servant was beside him with a fan to keep away the
flies and gnats. He had hardly opened his eyes when his little servant
brought him a basin and towel, and held ready for him to put on the
nicest new clothes of brown silk, most beautifully made; with these
was a pair of new black shoes with red ribbons, such as John had never
beheld in Rambin or in Rodenkirchen either. There were also there
several pairs of glittering glass shoes, such as are only used on
great occasions. John was, we may well suppose, delighted to have such
clothes to wear, and he put them on joyfully. His servant then flew
like lightning and returned with a fine breakfast of wine and milk,
and delicate white bread and fruits, and such other things as little
boys are fond of. He now perceived, every moment, more and more, that
Klas Starkwolt, the old cowherd, knew what he was talking about, for
the splendour and magnificence here surpassed anything John had ever
dreamt of. His servant, too, was the most obedient one possible; a nod
or a sign was enough for him, for he was as wise as a bee, as all
these little people are by nature.
John's bedroom was all covered with emeralds and other precious
stones, and in the ceiling was a diamond as big as a nine-pin bowl,
that gave light to the whole chamber. In this place they have neither
sun, nor moon, nor stars to give them light; neither do they use lamps
or candles of any kind; but they live in the midst of precious stones,
and have the purest of gold and silver in abundance, from which they
manage to obtain light both by day and by night, though indeed,
properly speaking, as there is no sun here, there is no distinction of
day and night, and they reckon only by weeks. They set the brightest
and clearest precious stones in their dwellings, and the ways and
passages leading under the ground, and in the places where they have
their large halls, and their dances and feasts; and the sparkle of
these jewels makes a sort of silvery twilight which is far more
beautiful than common day.
When John had finished his breakfast, his servant opened a little door
in the wall, where was a closet with silver and gold cups and dishes
and other vessels, and baskets filled with ducats, and boxes of jewels
and precious stones. There were also charming pictures, and the most
delightful story-books he had seen in the whole course of his life.
John spent the morning looking at these things; and, when it was
mid-day, a bell rung, and his servant said, "Will you dine alone, sir,
or with the large company?"
"With the large company, to be sure," replied John. So his servant led
him out. John, however, saw nothing but solitary halls, lighted up
with precious stones, and here and there little men and women, who
appeared to him to glide out of the clefts and fissures of the rocks.
Wondering what it was the bells rang for, he said to his servant--"But
where is the company?" And scarcely had he spoken when the hall they
were in opened out to a great extent, and a canopy set with diamonds
and precious stones was drawn over it. At the same moment he saw an
immense throng of nicely dressed little men and women pouring in
through several open doors: the floor opened in several places, and
tables, covered with the most beautiful ware, and the most luscious
meats, and fruits, and wines, arranged themselves in rows, and the
chairs arranged themselves along beside the tables, and then the men
and women took their seats.
The principal persons now came forward, bowed to John, and led him to
their table, where they placed him among their most beautiful maidens,
a distinction which pleased John well. The party too was very merry,
for the underground people are extremely lively and cheerful, and can
never stay long quiet. Then the most charming music sounded over their
heads; and beautiful birds, flying about, sung sweetly: these were not
real but artificial birds, which the little men make so ingeniously
that they can fly about and sing like natural ones.
The servants of both sexes, who waited at table, and handed about the
gold cups, and the silver and crystal baskets with fruit, were mortal
children, whom some misfortune had thrown among the underground
people, and who, having come down without securing any pledge, such as
John's cap, had fallen into their power. These were differently clad
from their masters. The boys and girls were dressed in snow-white
coats and jackets, and wore glass shoes, so thin that their steps
could never be heard, with blue caps on their heads, and silver belts
round their waists.
John at first pitied them, seeing how they were forced to run about
and wait on the little people; but as they looked cheerful and happy,
and were handsomely dressed, and had such rosy cheeks, he said to
himself--"After all, they are not so badly off, and I was myself much
worse when I had to be running after the cows and bullocks. To be
sure, I am now a master here, and they are servants; but there is no
help for it: why were they so foolish as to let themselves be taken
and not get some pledge beforehand? At any rate, the time must come
when they shall be set at liberty, and they will certainly not be
longer than fifty years here." With these thoughts he consoled
himself, and sported and played away with his little playfellows, and
ate, and drank, and made his servant and the others tell him stories,
for he always liked to hear something strange, and to get to the
bottom of everything.
They sat at table about two hours: the principal person then rang a
little bell, and the tables and chairs all vanished in a whiff,
leaving the company standing on their feet. The birds now struck up a
most lively air, and the little people began to dance, jumping and
leaping and whirling round and round, as if the world were grown
dizzy. And the pretty little girls that sat next John caught hold of
him and whirled him about; and, without making any resistance, he
danced with them for two good hours. Every afternoon while he remained
there he used to do the same; and, to the last hour of his life, he
always spoke of it with the greatest glee.
When the music and dancing were over, it might be about four o'clock.
The little people then disappeared, and went each about their work or
their pleasure. After supper they sported and danced in the same way;
and at midnight, especially on starlight nights, they slipped out of
their hills to dance in the open air. John used then, like a good boy,
to say his prayers and go to sleep, a duty he never neglected either
in the evening or in the morning.
For the first week that John was in the glass-hill he only went from
his chamber to the great hall and back again. After then, however, he
began to walk about, making his servant show and explain everything to
him. He found that there were here most beautiful walks, in which he
might ramble along for miles, in all directions, without ever finding
an end of them, so immensely large was the hill that the little people
lived in, and yet outwardly it seemed but a little hill, with a few
bushes and trees growing on it.
He found also meadows and lanes, islands and lakes, where the birds
sang sweeter, and the flowers were more brilliant and fragrant than
anything he had ever seen on earth. There was a breeze, and yet one
did not feel the wind; it was quite clear and bright, but there was no
heat; the waves were dashing, still there was no danger; and the most
beautiful little barks and canoes came, like white swans, when one
wanted to cross the water, and went backwards and forwards of their
own accord. Whence all this came nobody knew, nor could his servant
tell anything about it.
These lovely meads and plains were, for the most part, all solitary.
Few of the underground people were to be seen upon them, and those
that were just glided across them, as if in the greatest hurry. It
very rarely happened that any of them danced out here in the open air;
sometimes about three of them did so; at the most half a dozen: John
never saw a greater number together. The meadows never seemed
cheerful, except when the earth-children, who were kept as servants,
were let out to walk. This, however, happened but twice a week, for
they were mostly kept employed in the great hall and adjoining
apartments, or at school.
For John soon found they had schools there also; he had been there
about ten months, when one day he saw something snow-white gliding
into a rock, and disappearing. "What!" said he to his servant, "are
there some of you too that wear white, like the servants?" He was
informed that there were; but they were few in number, and never
appeared at the large tables or the dances, except once a year, on the
birthday of the great Hill-king, who dwelt many thousand miles below
in the great deep. These were the oldest men among them, some being
many thousand years old; they knew all things, and could tell of the
beginning of the world, and were called the Wise. They lived all
alone, and only left their chambers to instruct the underground
children and the attendants of both sexes.
John was greatly interested by this news, and he determined to take
advantage of it: so next morning he made his servant conduct him to
the school, and was so well pleased with it that he never missed a
day. The scholars were taught reading, writing, and accounts, to
compose and relate histories and stories, and many elegant kinds of
work; so that many came out of the hills very prudent and learned. The
biggest, and those of best capacity, received instruction in natural
science and astronomy, and in poetry and riddle-making, arts highly
esteemed by the little people. John was very diligent, and soon became
a clever painter; he wrought, too, most ingeniously in gold, and
silver, and stones; and in verse and riddle-making he had no fellow.
John had spent many a happy year here without ever thinking of the
upper world, or of those he had left behind, so pleasantly passed the
time--so many an agreeable playfellow had he among the children.
Of all his playfellows there was none of whom he was so fond as of a
little fair-haired girl, named Elizabeth Krabbin. She was from his own
village, and was the daughter of Frederick Krabbe, the minister of
Rambin. She was but four years old when she was taken away, and John
had often heard tell of her. She was not, however, stolen by the
little people, but came into their power in this manner. One day in
summer, she, with other children, ran out into the fields: in their
rambles they went to the Nine-hills, where little Elizabeth fell
asleep, and was forgotten by the rest. At night, when she awoke, she
found herself under the ground among the little people. It was not
merely because she was from his own village that John was so fond of
Elizabeth, but she was a most beautiful child, with clear blue eyes
and ringlets of fair hair, and a most angelic smile.
Time flew away unperceived: John was now eighteen, and Elizabeth
sixteen. Their childish fondness was now become love, and the little
people were pleased to see it, thinking that by means of her they
might get John to renounce his power, and become their servant; for
they were fond of him, and would willingly have had him to wait upon
them; the love of dominion is their vice. But they were mistaken; John
had learned too much from his servant to be caught in that way.
John's chief delight was walking about alone with Elizabeth; for he
now knew every place so well that he could dispense with the
attendance of his servant. In these rambles he was always gay and
lively, but his companion was frequently sad and melancholy, thinking
of the land above, where men lived, and where the sun, moon, and stars
shine. Now it happened in one of their walks, that as they talked of
their love, and it was after midnight, they passed under the place
where the tops of the glass hills used to open and let the underground
people in and out. As they went along they heard of a sudden the
crowing of several cocks above. At this sound, which she had not heard
for twelve years, little Elizabeth felt her heart so affected that she
could contain herself no longer, but throwing her arms about John's
neck, she bathed his cheeks with her tears. At length she spake--
"Dearest John," said she, "everything down here is very beautiful, and
the little people are kind, and do nothing to injure me, but still I
have always been uneasy, nor ever felt any pleasure till I began to
love you; and yet that is not pure pleasure, for this is not a right
way of living, such as it should be for human beings. Every night I
dream of my dear father and mother, and of our church-yard, where the
people stand so piously at the church-door waiting for my father, and
I could weep tears of blood that I cannot go into the church with
them, and worship God as a human being should; for this is no
Christian life we lead down here, but a delusive half heathen one. And
only think, dear John, that we can never marry, as there is no priest
to join us. Do, then, plan some way for us to leave this place; for I
cannot tell you how I long to get once more to my father, and among
pious Christians."
John too had not been unaffected by the crowing of the cocks, and he
felt what he had never felt here before, a longing after the land
where the sun shines. He replied--
"Dear Elizabeth, all you say is true, and I now feel that it is a sin
for Christians to stay here; and it seems to me as if our Lord said to
us in that cry of the cocks, 'Come up, ye Christian children, out of
those abodes of illusion and magic; come to the light of the stars,
and act as children of light.' I now feel that it was a great sin for
me to come down here, but I trust I shall be forgiven on account of my
youth; for I was a child and knew not what I did. But now I will not
stay a day longer. They cannot keep me here."
At these last words, Elizabeth turned pale, for she recollected that
she was a servant, and must serve her fifty years. "And what will it
avail me," cried she, "that I shall continue young and be but as
twenty years old when I go out, for my father and mother will be dead,
and all my companions old and gray; and you, dearest John, will be old
and gray also," cried she, throwing herself on his bosom.
John was thunderstruck at this, for it had never before occurred to
him; he, however, comforted her as well as he could, and declared he
would never leave the place without her. He spent the whole night in
forming various plans, at last he fixed on one, and in the morning he
dispatched his servant to summon to his apartment six of the principal
of the little people. When they came, John thus mildly addressed them:
"My friends, you know how I came here, not as a prisoner or servant,
but as a lord and master over one of you, and consequently, over all.
You have now for the ten years I have been with you treated me with
respect and attention, and for that I am your debtor. But you are
still more my debtors, for I might have given you every sort of
annoyance and vexation, and you must have submitted to it. I have,
however, not done so, but have behaved as your equal, and have sported
and played with you rather than ruled over you. I now have one request
to make. There is a girl among your servants whom I love, Elizabeth
Krabbin, of Rambin, where I was born. Give her to me, and let us
depart. For I will return to where the sun shines and the plough goes
through the land. I ask to take nothing with me but her, and the
ornaments and furniture of my chamber."
He spoke in a determined tone, and they hesitated and cast their eyes
to the ground; at last the eldest of them replied:
"Sir, you ask what we cannot grant. It is a fixed law, that no servant
should leave this place before the appointed time. Were we to break
through this law, our whole subterranean empire would fall. Anything
else you desire, for we love and respect you, but we cannot give up
Elizabeth."
"You can and you shall give her up," cried John in a rage; "go think
of it till to-morrow. Return here at this hour. I will show you
whether or no I can triumph over your hypocritical and cunning
stratagems."
The six retired. Next morning, on their return, John addressed them in
the kindest manner, but to no purpose; they persisted in their
refusal. He gave them till the following day, threatening them
severely in case of their still proving refractory.
Next day, when the six little people appeared before him, John looked
at them sternly, and made no reply to their salutations, but said to
them shortly, "Yes or No?" And they answered with one voice, "No." He
then ordered his servant to summon twenty-four more of the principal
persons, with their wives and children. When they came, they were in
all five hundred men, women, and children. John ordered them forthwith
to go and fetch pickaxes, spades, and bars, which they did in a
second.
He now led them out to a rock in one of the fields, and ordered them
to fall to work at blasting, hewing, and dragging stones. They toiled
patiently, and made as if it was only sport to them. From morning till
night their taskmaster made them labour without ceasing, standing over
them constantly, to prevent their resting. Still their obstinacy was
inflexible; and at the end of some weeks his pity for them was so
great, that he was obliged to give over.
He now thought of a new species of punishment for them. He ordered
them to appear before him next morning, each provided with a new whip.
They obeyed, and John commanded them to strip and lash one another
till the blood should run down on the ground, while he stood looking
on as grim and cruel as an Eastern tyrant. Still the little people cut
and slashed themselves, and mocked at John, and refused to comply with
his wishes. This he did for three or four days.
Several other courses did he try, but all in vain; his temper was too
gentle to struggle with their obstinacy, and he began now to despair
of ever accomplishing his dearest wish. He began to hate the little
people whom he was before so fond of; he kept away from their banquets
and dances, associated only with Elizabeth, and ate and drank quite
solitary in his chamber. In short, he became almost a perfect hermit,
and sank into moodiness and melancholy.
While in this temper, as he was taking a solitary walk in the evening,
and, to divert his melancholy, was flinging the stones that lay in his
path against each other, he happened to break a tolerably large one,
and out of it jumped a toad. The moment John saw the ugly animal, he
caught him up in ecstasy, and put him into his pocket and ran home,
crying, "Now I have her! I have my Elizabeth! Now you shall catch it,
you little mischievous rascals!" And on getting home he put the toad
into a costly silver casket, as if it was the greatest treasure.
To account for John's joy you must know Klas Starkwolt had often told
him that the underground people could not endure any ill odour, and
that the sight or even the smell of a toad made them faint and suffer
the most dreadful tortures, so that, by means of these animals, one
could compel them to anything. Hence there are no bad smells to be
found in the whole glass empire, and a toad is a thing unheard of
there; this toad must therefore have been inclosed in the stone from
the Creation, as it were for the sake of John and Elizabeth.
Resolved to try the effect of his toad, John took the casket under his
arm and went out, and on the way he met two of the little people in a
lonesome place. The moment he approached them they fell to the ground,
and whimpered and howled most lamentably, as long as he was near them.
Satisfied now of his power, he next morning summoned the fifty
principal persons, with their wives and children, to his apartment.
When they came, he addressed them, reminding them once again of his
kindness and gentleness towards them, and of the good terms on which
they had hitherto lived together. He reproached them with their
ingratitude in refusing him the only favour he had ever asked of them,
but firmly declared he would not give way to their obstinacy.
"Wherefore," said he, "for the last time, I warn you;--think for a
minute, and if you then say No, you shall feel that pain which is to
you and your children the most terrible of all sufferings."
They did not take long to deliberate, but unanimously replied "No;"
for they thought to themselves, What new scheme has the youth hit on,
with which he thinks to frighten wise ones like us? and they smiled
when they said No. Their smiling enraged John above all, and he ran
back to where he had laid the casket with the toad, under a bush.
He was hardly come within a hundred paces of them when they all fell
to the ground as if struck with a thunderbolt, and began to howl and
whimper, and to writhe, as if suffering the most excruciating pain.
They stretched out their hands, and cried, "Have mercy! have mercy! we
feel you have a toad, and there is no escape for us. Take the odious
beast away, and we will do all you require." He let them kick a few
seconds longer, and then took the toad away. They then stood up and
felt no more pain. John let all depart but the six chief persons, to
whom he said,--
"This night, between twelve and one, Elizabeth and I will depart. Load
then for me three waggons, with gold, and silver, and precious stones.
I might, you know, take all that is in the hill, and you deserve it,
but I will be merciful. Farther, you must put all the furniture of my
chamber in two waggons, and get ready for me the handsomest
travelling-carriage that is in the hill with six black horses.
Moreover, you must set at liberty all the servants who have been so
long here that on earth they would be twenty years old and upwards,
and you must give them as much silver and gold as will make them rich
for life, and make a law that no one shall be detained here longer
than his twentieth year."
The six took the oath, and went away quite melancholy, and John buried
his toad deep in the ground. The little people laboured hard according
to his bidding. At midnight everything was out of the hill, and John
and Elizabeth got into the silver tun and were drawn up.
It was then one o'clock, and midsummer-eve, the very time that twelve
years before John had gone down into the hill. Music sounded around
them, and they saw the glass hill open, and the rays of the light of
heaven shine on them for the first time after so many years; and when
they got out they saw the streaks of dawn already in the east. Crowds
of the underground people were around them busied about the waggons.
John bade them a last farewell, waved his brown cap three times in the
air, and then flung it among them. And at the same moment he ceased to
see them; he beheld nothing but a green hill, and the well-known
bushes and fields, and heard the church-clock of Rambin strike two.
When all was still, save a few larks who were tuning their morning
songs, they both fell on their knees and worshipped God, resolving
henceforth to lead a pious and a Christian life.
When the sun rose, John and his Elizabeth, with the children whom they
had saved from the underground people, set out for Rambin. Every
well-known object that they saw awakened pleasing recollections; and
as they passed by Rodenkirchen, John recognised, among the people
that gazed at and followed them, his old friend Klas Starkwolt, the
cowherd, and his dog Speed. It was four in the morning when they
entered Rambin, and they halted in the middle of the village, about
twenty paces from the house where John was born. The whole village
poured out to gaze on these Asiatic princes; for such the old sexton,
who had in his youth been at Moscow and Constantinople, said they
were. There John saw his father and mother, and his brother Andrew,
and his sister Trine. The old minister, Krabbe, stood there too, in
his black slippers and white nightcap, gaping and staring with the
rest.
John discovered himself to his parents, and Elizabeth to hers, and the
wedding-day was soon fixed, and such a wedding was never seen before
or since in the island of Rugen; for John sent to Stralsund and
Greifswald for whole boat-loads of wine, and sugar, and coffee, and
whole herds of oxen, sheep, and pigs. The quantity of harts and roes
and hares that were shot on the occasion it were vain to attempt to
tell, or to count the fish that were caught. There was not a musician
in Rugen and Pomerania that was not engaged, for John was immensely
rich, and he wished to display his wealth.
John did not neglect his old friend Klas Starkwolt, the cowherd. He
gave him enough to make him comfortable for the rest of his days, and
insisted on his coming and staying with him as often and as long as he
After his marriage, John made a progress through the country with his
beautiful Elizabeth and they purchased towns, and villages, and
lands, until he became master of nearly half Rugen and a very
considerable portion of the country. His father, old James Dietrich,
was made a nobleman, and his brothers and sisters gentlemen and
ladies--for what cannot money do?
John and his wife spent their days in acts of piety and charity. They
built several churches, they had the blessings of every one that knew
them, and died universally lamented. It was Count John Dietrich who
built and richly endowed the present church of Rambin. He built it on
the site of his father's house, and presented to it several of the
cups and plates made by the underground people, and his own and
Elizabeth's glass shoes, in memory of what had befallen them in their
youth. But they were all taken away in the time of the great Charles
the Twelfth of Sweden, when the Russians came on the island, and the
Cossacks plundered even the churches, and took away everything.
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.
There was once a very rich merchant, who had six children, three boys
and three girls. As he was himself a man of great sense, he spared no
expense for their education. The three daughters were all handsome,
but particularly the youngest; indeed, she was so very beautiful, that
in her childhood every one called her the Little Beauty; and being
equally lovely when she was grown up, nobody called her by any other
name, which made her sisters very jealous of her. This youngest
daughter was not only more handsome than her sisters, but also was
better tempered. The two eldest were vain of their wealth and
position. They gave themselves a thousand airs, and refused to visit
other merchants' daughters; nor would they condescend to be seen
except with persons of quality. They went every day to balls, plays,
and public walks, and always made game of their youngest sister for
spending her time in reading or other useful employments. As it was
well known that these young ladies would have large fortunes, many
great merchants wished to get them for wives; but the two eldest
always answered, that, for their parts, they had no thoughts of
marrying any one below a duke or an earl at least. Beauty had quite as
many offers as her sisters, but she always answered, with the
greatest civility, that though she was much obliged to her lovers, she
would rather live some years longer with her father, as she thought
herself too young to marry.
It happened that, by some unlucky accident, the merchant suddenly lost
all his fortune, and had nothing left but a small cottage in the
country. Upon this he said to his daughters, while the tears ran down
his cheeks, "My children, we must now go and dwell in the cottage, and
try to get a living by labour, for we have no other means of support."
The two eldest replied that they did not know how to work, and would
not leave town; for they had lovers enough who would be glad to marry
them, though they had no longer any fortune. But in this they were
mistaken; for when the lovers heard what had happened, they said, "The
girls were so proud and ill-tempered, that all we wanted was their
fortune: we are not sorry at all to see their pride brought down: let
them show off their airs to their cows and sheep." But everybody
pitied poor Beauty, because she was so sweet-tempered and kind to all,
and several gentlemen offered to marry her, though she had not a
penny; but Beauty still refused, and said she could not think of
leaving her poor father in this trouble. At first Beauty could not
help sometimes crying in secret for the hardships she was now obliged
to suffer; but in a very short time she said to herself, "All the
crying in the world will do me no good, so I will try to be happy
without a fortune."
When they had removed to their cottage, the merchant and his three
sons employed themselves in ploughing and sowing the fields, and
working in the garden. Beauty also did her part, for she rose by four
o'clock every morning, lighted the fires, cleaned the house, and got
ready the breakfast for the whole family. At first she found all this
very hard; but she soon grew quite used to it, and thought it no
hardship; indeed, the work greatly benefited her health. When she had
done, she used to amuse herself with reading, playing her music, or
singing while she spun. But her two sisters were at a loss what to do
to pass the time away: they had their breakfast in bed, and did not
rise till ten o'clock. Then they commonly walked out, but always found
themselves very soon tired; when they would often sit down under a
shady tree, and grieve for the loss of their carriage and fine
clothes, and say to each other, "What a mean-spirited poor stupid
creature our young sister is, to be so content with this low way of
life!" But their father thought differently: and loved and admired his
youngest child more than ever.
After they had lived in this manner about a year, the merchant
received a letter, which informed him that one of his richest ships,
which he thought was lost, had just come into port. This news made the
two eldest sisters almost mad with joy; for they thought they should
now leave the cottage, and have all their finery again. When they
found that their father must take a journey to the ship, the two
eldest begged he would not fail to bring them back some new gowns,
caps, rings, and all sorts of trinkets. But Beauty asked for nothing;
for she thought in herself that all the ship was worth would hardly
buy everything her sisters wished for. "Beauty," said the merchant,
"how comes it that you ask for nothing: what can I bring you, my
"Since you are so kind as to think of me, dear father," she answered,
"I should be glad if you would bring me a rose, for we have none in
our garden." Now Beauty did not indeed wish for a rose, nor anything
else, but she only said this that she might not affront her sisters;
otherwise they would have said she wanted her father to praise her for
desiring nothing. The merchant took his leave of them, and set out on
his journey; but when he got to the ship, some persons went to law
with him about the cargo, and after a deal of trouble he came back to
his cottage as poor as he had left it. When he was within thirty miles
of his home, and thinking of the joy of again meeting his children, he
lost his way in the midst of a dense forest. It rained and snowed very
hard, and, besides, the wind was so high as to throw him twice from
his horse. Night came on, and he feared he should die of cold and
hunger, or be torn to pieces by the wolves that he heard howling round
him. All at once, he cast his eyes towards a long avenue, and saw at
the end a light, but it seemed a great way off. He made the best of
his way towards it, and found that it came from a splendid palace, the
windows of which were all blazing with light. It had great bronze
gates, standing wide open, and fine court-yards, through which the
merchant passed; but not a living soul was to be seen. There were
stables too, which his poor, starved horse, less scrupulous than
himself, entered at once, and took a good meal of oats and hay. His
master then tied him up, and walked towards the entrance hall, but
still without seeing a single creature. He went on to a large
dining-parlour, where he found a good fire, and a table covered with
some very nice dishes, but only one plate with a knife and fork. As
the snow and rain had wetted him to the skin, he went up to the fire
to dry himself. "I hope," said he, "the master of the house or his
servants will excuse me, for it surely will not be long now before I
see them." He waited some time, but still nobody came: at last the
clock struck eleven, and the merchant, being quite faint for the want
of food, helped himself to a chicken, and to a few glasses of wine,
yet all the time trembling with fear. He sat till the clock struck
twelve, and then, taking courage, began to think he might as well look
about him: so he opened a door at the end of the hall, and went
through it into a very grand room, in which there was a fine bed; and
as he was feeling very weary, he shut the door, took off his clothes,
and got into it.
It was ten o'clock in the morning before he awoke, when he was amazed
to see a handsome new suit of clothes laid ready for him, instead of
his own, which were all torn and spoiled. "To be sure," said he to
himself, "this place belongs to some good fairy, who has taken pity on
my ill luck." He looked out of the window, and instead of the
snow-covered wood, where he had lost himself the previous night, he
saw the most charming arbours covered with all kinds of flowers.
Returning to the hall where he had supped, he found a breakfast table,
ready prepared. "Indeed, my good fairy," said the merchant aloud, "I
am vastly obliged to you for your kind care of me." He then made a
hearty breakfast, took his hat, and was going to the stable to pay his
horse a visit; but as he passed under one of the arbours, which was
loaded with roses, he thought of what Beauty had asked him to bring
back to her, and so he took a bunch of roses to carry home. At the
same moment he heard a loud noise, and saw coming towards him a beast,
so frightful to look at that he was ready to faint with fear.
"Ungrateful man!" said the beast in a terrible voice, "I have saved
your life by admitting you into my palace, and in return you steal my
roses, which I value more than anything I possess. But you shall atone
for your fault: you shall die in a quarter of an hour."
The merchant fell on his knees, and clasping his hands, said, "Sir, I
humbly beg your pardon: I did not think it would offend you to gather
a rose for one of my daughters, who had entreated me to bring her one
home. Do not kill me, my lord!"
"I am not a lord, but a beast," replied the monster; "I hate false
compliments: so do not fancy that you can coax me by any such ways.
You tell me that you have daughters; now I suffer you to escape, if
one of them will come and die in your stead. If not, promise that you
will yourself return in three months, to be dealt with as I may
choose."
The tender-hearted merchant had no thoughts of letting any one of his
daughters die for his sake; but he knew that if he seemed to accept
the beast's terms, he should at least have the pleasure of seeing them
once again. So he gave his promise, and was told he might then set off
as soon as he liked. "But," said the beast, "I do not wish you to go
back empty-handed. Go to the room you slept in, and you will find a
chest there; fill it with whatsoever you like best, and I will have it
taken to your own house for you."
When the beast had said this, he went away. The good merchant, left to
himself, began to consider that as he must die--for he had no thought
of breaking a promise, made even to a beast--he might as well have the
comfort of leaving his children provided for. He returned to the room
he had slept in, and found there heaps of gold pieces lying about. He
filled the chest with them to the very brim, locked it, and, mounting
his horse, left the palace as sorrowful as he had been glad when he
first beheld it. The horse took a path across the forest of his own
accord, and in a few hours they reached the merchant's house. His
children came running round him, but, instead of kissing them with
joy, he could not help weeping as he looked at them. He held in his
hand the bunch of roses, which he gave to Beauty saying, "Take these
roses, Beauty; but little do you think how dear they have cost your
poor father;" and then he gave them an account of all that he had seen
or heard in the palace of the beast.
The two eldest sisters now began to shed tears, and to lay the blame
upon Beauty, who, they said, would be the cause of her father's death.
"See," said they, "what happens from the pride of the little wretch;
why did not she ask for such things as we did? But, to be sure, Miss
must not be like other people; and though she will be the cause of her
father's death, yet she does not shed a tear."
"It would be useless," replied Beauty, "for my father shall not die.
As the beast will accept of one of his daughters, I will give myself
up, and be only too happy to prove my love for the best of fathers."
"No, sister," said the three brothers with one voice, "that cannot be;
we will go in search of this monster, and either he or we will
perish."
"Do not hope to kill him," said the merchant, "his power is far too
great. But Beauty's young life shall not be sacrificed: I am old, and
cannot expect to live much longer; so I shall but give up a few years
of my life, and shall only grieve for the sake of my children."
"Never, father!" cried Beauty: "If you go back to the palace, you
cannot hinder my going after you; though young, I am not over-fond of
life; and I would much rather be eaten up by the monster, than die of
grief for your loss."
The merchant in vain tried to reason with Beauty, who still
obstinately kept to her purpose; which, in truth, made her two sisters
glad, for they were jealous of her, because everybody loved her.
The merchant was so grieved at the thoughts of losing his child, that
he never once thought of the chest filled with gold, but at night, to
his great surprise, he found it standing by his bedside. He said
nothing about his riches to his eldest daughters, for he knew very
well it would at once make them want to return to town; but he told
Beauty his secret, and she then said, that while he was away, two
gentlemen had been on a visit at their cottage, who had fallen in love
with her two sisters. She entreated her father to marry them without
delay, for she was so sweet-natured, she only wished them to be happy.
Three months went by, only too fast, and then the merchant and Beauty
got ready to set out for the palace of the beast. Upon this, the two
sisters rubbed their eyes with an onion, to make believe they were
crying; both the merchant and his sons cried in earnest. Only Beauty
shed no tears. They reached the palace in a very few hours, and the
horse, without bidding, went into the same stable as before. The
merchant and Beauty walked towards the large hall, where they found a
table covered with every dainty, and two plates laid ready. The
merchant had very little appetite; but Beauty, that she might the
better hide her grief, placed herself at the table, and helped her
father; she then began to eat herself, and thought all the time that,
to be sure, the beast had a mind to fatten her before he ate her up,
since he had provided such good cheer for her. When they had done
their supper, they heard a great noise, and the good old man began to
bid his poor child farewell, for he knew it was the beast coming to
them. When Beauty first saw that frightful form, she was very much
terrified, but tried to hide her fear. The creature walked up to her,
and eyed her all over--then asked her in a dreadful voice if she had
come quite of her own accord.
"Yes," said Beauty.
"Then you are a good girl, and I am very much obliged to you."
This was such an astonishingly civil answer that Beauty's courage
rose: but it sank again when the beast, addressing the merchant,
desired him to leave the palace next morning, and never return to it
again. "And so good night, merchant. And good night, Beauty."
"Good night, beast," she answered, as the monster shuffled out of the
room.
"Ah! my dear child," said the merchant, kissing his daughter, "I am
half dead already, at the thought of leaving you with this dreadful
beast; you shall go back and let me stay in your place."
"No," said Beauty, boldly, "I will never agree to that; you must go
home to-morrow morning."
They then wished each other good night, and went to bed, both of them
thinking they should not be able to close their eyes; but as soon as
ever they had lain down, they fell into a deep sleep, and did not
awake till morning. Beauty dreamed that a lady came up to her, who
said, "I am very much pleased, Beauty, with the goodness you have
shown, in being willing to give your life to save that of your father.
Do not be afraid of anything; you shall not go without a reward."
As soon as Beauty awoke, she told her father this dream; but though it
gave him some comfort, he was a long time before he could be persuaded
to leave the palace. At last Beauty succeeded in getting him safely
When her father was out of sight, poor Beauty began to weep sorely;
still, having naturally a courageous spirit, she soon resolved not to
make her sad case still worse by sorrow, which she knew was vain, but
to wait and be patient. She walked about to take a view of all the
palace, and the elegance of every part of it much charmed her.
But what was her surprise, when she came to a door on which was
written, BEAUTY'S ROOM! She opened it in haste, and her eyes were
dazzled by the splendour and taste of the apartment. What made her
wonder more than all the rest, was a large library filled with books,
a harpsichord, and many pieces of music. "The beast surely does not
mean to eat me up immediately," said she, "since he takes care I shall
not be at a loss how to amuse myself." She opened the library and saw
these verses written in letters of gold on the back of one of the
books:--
    "Beauteous lady, dry your tears,
    Here's no cause for sighs or fears.
    Command as freely as you may,
    For you command and I obey."
"Alas!" said she, sighing; "I wish I could only command a sight of my
poor father, and to know what he is doing at this moment." Just then,
by chance, she cast her eyes on a looking-glass that stood near her,
and in it she saw a picture of her old home, and her father riding
mournfully up to the door. Her sisters came out to meet him, and
although they tried to look sorry, it was easy to see that in their
hearts they were very glad. In a short time all this picture
disappeared, but it caused Beauty to think that the beast, besides
being very powerful, was also very kind. About the middle of the day
she found a table laid ready for her, and a sweet concert of music
played all the time she was dining, without her seeing anybody. But at
supper, when she was going to seat herself at table, she heard the
noise of the beast, and could not help trembling with fear.
"Beauty," said he, "will you give me leave to see you sup?"
"That is as you please," answered she, very much afraid.
"Not in the least," said the beast; "you alone command in this place.
If you should not like my company, you need only say so, and I will
leave you that moment. But tell me, Beauty, do you not think me very
ugly?"
"Why, yes," said she, "for I cannot tell a falsehood; but then I think
you are very good."
"Am I?" sadly replied the beast; "yet, besides being ugly, I am also
very stupid: I know well enough that I am but a beast."
"Very stupid people," said Beauty, "are never aware of it themselves."
At which kindly speech the beast looked pleased, and replied, not
without an awkward sort of politeness, "Pray do not let me detain you
from supper, and be sure that you are well served. All you see is your
own, and I should be deeply grieved if you wanted for any thing."
"You are very kind--so kind that I almost forgot you are so ugly,"
said Beauty, earnestly.
"Ah! yes," answered the beast, with a great sigh; "I hope I am
good-tempered, but still I am only a monster."
"There is many a monster who wears the form of a man; it is better of
the two to have the heart of a man and the form of a monster."
"I would thank you, Beauty, for this speech, but I am too senseless to
say anything that would please you," returned the beast in a
melancholy voice; and altogether he seemed so gentle and so unhappy,
that Beauty, who had the tenderest heart in the world, felt her fear
of him gradually vanish.
She ate her supper with a good appetite, and conversed in her own
sensible and charming way, till at last, when the beast rose to
depart, he terrified her more than ever by saying abruptly, in his
gruff voice, "Beauty, will you marry me!"
Now Beauty, frightened as she was, would speak only the exact truth;
besides, her father had told her that the beast liked only to have
the truth spoken to him. So she answered, in a very firm tone, "No,
beast."
He did not go into a passion, or do anything but sigh deeply, and
depart.
When Beauty found herself alone, she began to feel pity for the poor
beast. "Oh!" said she, "what a sad thing it is that he should be so
very frightful, since he is so good-tempered!"
Beauty lived three months in this palace very well pleased. The beast
came to see her every night, and talked with her while she supped; and
though what he said was not very clever, yet, as she saw in him every
day some new goodness, instead of dreading the time of his coming, she
soon began continually looking at her watch, to see if it were nine
o'clock; for that was the hour when he never failed to visit her. One
thing only vexed her, which was that every night before he went away,
he always made it a rule to ask her if she would be his wife, and
seemed very much grieved at her steadfastly replying "No." At last,
one night, she said to him, "You wound me greatly, beast, by forcing
me to refuse you so often; I wish I could take such a liking to you as
to agree to marry you: but I must tell you plainly, that I do not
think it will ever happen. I shall always be your friend; so try to
let that content you."
"I must," sighed the beast, "for I know well enough how frightful I
am; but I love you better than myself. Yet I think I am very lucky in
your being pleased to stay with me: now promise me, Beauty, that you
will never leave me."
Beauty would almost have agreed to this, so sorry was she for him, but
she had that day seen in her magic glass, which she looked at
constantly, that her father was dying of grief for her sake.
"Alas!" she said, "I long so much to see my father, that if you do not
give me leave to visit him, I shall break my heart."
"I would rather break mine, Beauty," answered the beast; "I will send
you to your father's cottage: you shall stay there, and your poor
beast shall die of sorrow."
"No," said Beauty, crying, "I love you too well to be the cause of
your death; I promise to return in a week. You have shown me that my
sisters are married, and my brothers are gone for soldiers, so that my
father is left all alone. Let me stay a week with him."
"You shall find yourself with him to-morrow morning," replied the
beast; "but mind, do not forget your promise. When you wish to return,
you have nothing to do but to put your ring on a table when you go to
bed. Good-bye, Beauty!" The beast sighed as he said these words, and
Beauty went to bed very sorry to see him so much grieved. When she
awoke in the morning, she found herself in her father's cottage. She
rang a bell that was at her bedside, and a servant entered; but as
soon as she saw Beauty, the woman gave a loud shriek; upon which the
merchant ran upstairs, and when he beheld his daughter he ran to her,
and kissed her a hundred times. At last Beauty began to remember that
she had brought no clothes with her to put on; but the servant told
her she had just found in the next room a large chest full of dresses,
trimmed all over with gold, and adorned with pearls and diamonds.
Beauty, in her own mind, thanked the beast for his kindness, and put
on the plainest gown she could find among them all. She then desired
the servant to lay the rest aside, for she intended to give them to
her sisters; but, as soon as she had spoken these words, the chest was
gone out of sight in a moment. Her father then suggested, perhaps the
beast chose for her to keep them all for herself: and as soon as he
had said this, they saw the chest standing again in the same place.
While Beauty was dressing herself, a servant brought word to her that
her sisters were come with their husbands to pay her a visit. They
both lived unhappily with the gentlemen they had married. The husband
of the eldest was very handsome, but was so proud of this, that he
thought of nothing else from morning till night, and did not care a
pin for the beauty of his wife. The second had married a man of great
learning; but he made no use of it, except to torment and affront all
his friends, and his wife more than any of them. The two sisters were
ready to burst with spite when they saw Beauty dressed like a
princess, and looking so very charming. All the kindness that she
showed them was of no use; for they were vexed more than ever when she
told them how happy she lived at the palace of the beast. The
spiteful creatures went by themselves into the garden, where they
cried to think of her good fortune.
"Why should the little wretch be better off than we?" said they. "We
are much handsomer than she is."
"Sister!" said the eldest, "a thought has just come into my head: let
us try to keep her here longer than the week for which the beast gave
her leave; and then he will be so angry, that perhaps when she goes
back to him he will eat her up in a moment."
"That is well thought of," answered the other, "but to do this, we
must pretend to be very kind."
They then went to join her in the cottage, where they showed her so
much false love, that Beauty could not help crying for joy.
When the week was ended, the two sisters began to pretend such grief
at the thought of her leaving them, that she agreed to stay a week
more: but all that time Beauty could not help fretting for the sorrow
that she knew her absence would give her poor beast; for she tenderly
loved him, and much wished for his company again. Among all the grand
and clever people she saw, she found nobody who was half so sensible,
so affectionate, so thoughtful, or so kind. The tenth night of her
being at the cottage, she dreamed she was in the garden of the palace,
that the beast lay dying on a grass-plot, and with his last breath put
her in mind of her promise, and laid his death to her forsaking him.
Beauty awoke in a great fright, and burst into tears. "Am not I
wicked," said she, "to behave so ill to a beast who has shown me so
much kindness? Why will not I marry him? I am sure I should be more
happy with him than my sisters are with their husbands. He shall not
be wretched any longer on my account; for I should do nothing but
blame myself all the rest of my life."
She then rose, put her ring on the table, got into bed again, and soon
fell asleep. In the morning she with joy found herself in the palace
of the beast. She dressed herself very carefully, that she might
please him the better, and thought she had never known a day pass away
so slowly. At last the clock struck nine, but the beast did not come.
Beauty, dreading lest she might truly have caused his death, ran from
room to room, calling out, "Beast, dear beast;" but there was no
answer. At last she remembered her dream, rushed to the grass-plot,
and there saw him lying apparently dead beside the fountain.
Forgetting all his ugliness, she threw herself upon his body, and,
finding his heart still beat, she fetched some water and sprinkled it
over him, weeping and sobbing the while.
The beast opened his eyes: "You forgot your promise, Beauty, and so I
determined to die; for I could not live without you. I have starved
myself to death, but I shall die content since I have seen your face
once more."
"No, dear beast," cried Beauty, passionately, "you shall not die; you
shall live to be my husband. I thought it was only friendship I felt
for you, but now I know it was love."
The moment Beauty had spoken these words, the palace was suddenly
lighted up, and all kinds of rejoicings were heard around them, none
which she noticed, but hung over her dear beast with the utmost
tenderness. At last, unable to restrain herself, she dropped her head
over her hands, covered her eyes, and cried for joy; and, when she
looked up again, the beast was gone. In his stead she saw at her feet
a handsome, graceful young prince, who thanked her with the tenderest
expressions for having freed him from enchantment.
"But where is my poor beast? I only want him and nobody else," sobbed
Beauty.
"I am he," replied the Prince. "A wicked fairy condemned me to this
form, and forbade me to show that I had any wit or sense, till a
beautiful lady should consent to marry me. You alone, dearest Beauty,
judged me neither by my looks nor by my talents, but by my heart
alone. Take it then, and all that I have besides, for all is yours."
Beauty, full of surprise, but very happy, suffered the prince to lead
her to his palace, where she found her father and sisters, who had
been brought there by the fairy-lady whom she had seen in a dream the
first night she came.
"Beauty," said the fairy, "you have chosen well, and you have your
reward, for a true heart is better than either good looks or clever
brains. As for you, ladies," and she turned to the two elder sisters,
"I know all your ill deeds, but I have no worse punishment for you
than to see your sister happy. You shall stand as statues at the door
of her palace, and when you repent of and have amended your faults,
you shall become women again. But, to tell you the truth, I very much
fear you will remain statues for ever."
LITTLE ONE EYE, LITTLE TWO EYES,
AND
Little Three Eyes.
There was a woman who had three daughters, the eldest of whom was
called Little One Eye, because she had only one eye in the middle of
her forehead; the second, Little Two Eyes, because she had two eyes
like other people; and the youngest, Little Three Eyes, because she
had three eyes, one of them being also in the middle of the forehead.
But because Little Two Eyes looked no different from other people, her
sisters and mother could not bear her. They said, "You with your two
eyes are no better than anybody else; you do not belong to us." They
knocked her about, and gave her shabby clothes, and food which was
left over from their own meals; in short, they vexed her whenever they
It happened that Little Two Eyes had to go out into the fields to look
after the goat; but she was still quite hungry, because her sisters
had given her so little to eat. She sat down on a hillock and began to
cry, and cried so much that two little streams ran down out of each
eye. And as she looked up once in her sorrow, a woman stood near her,
who asked, "Little Two Eyes, why do you cry?"
Little Two Eyes answered, "Have I not need to cry? Because I have two
eyes, like other people, my sisters and my mother cannot bear me; they
push me out of one corner into the other, give me shabby clothes, and
nothing to eat but what they leave. To-day they have given me so
little that I am still quite hungry."
The wise woman said, "Little Two Eyes, dry your tears, and I will tell
you something which will keep you from ever being hungry more. Only
say to your goat, 'Little goat, bleat; little table, rise,' and a
neatly-laid table will stand before you with the most delicious food
on it, so that you can eat as much as you like. And when you are
satisfied and do not want the table any more, only say, 'Little goat,
bleat; little table, away,' and it will all disappear before your
eyes." Then the wise woman went out of sight.
Little Two Eyes thought, "I must try directly if it is true what she
has said, for I am much too hungry to wait." So she said, "Little
goat, bleat; little table, rise;" and scarcely had she uttered the
words, when there stood before her a little table, covered with a
white cloth, on which was laid a plate, knife and fork, and silver
spoon. The most delicious food was there also, and smoking hot, as if
just come from the kitchen. Then Little Two Eyes said the shortest
grace that she knew, "Lord God, be our guest at all times.--Amen,"
began to eat, and found it very good. And when she had had enough, she
said as the wise woman had taught her--"Little goat, bleat; little
table, away." In an instant the little table, and all that stood on
it, had disappeared again. "That is a beautiful, easy way of
housekeeping," thought Little Two Eyes, and was quite happy and merry.
In the evening, when she came home with her goat, she found a little
earthen dish with food, which her sisters had put aside for her, but
she did not touch anything--she had no need. On the next day she went
out again with her goat, and let the few crusts that were given her
remain uneaten. The first time and the second time the sisters took no
notice; but when the same thing happened every day, they remarked it,
and said, "All is not right with Little Two Eyes; she always leaves
her food, and she used formerly to eat up everything that was given
her; she must have found other ways of dining."
In order to discover the truth, they resolved that Little One Eye
should go with Little Two Eyes when she drove the goat into the
meadow, and see what she did there, and whether anybody brought her
anything to eat and drink. So when Little Two Eyes set out again,
Little One Eye came to her and said, "I will go with you into the
field, and see that the goat is taken proper care of, and driven to
good pasture."
But Little Two Eyes saw what Little One Eye had in her mind, and drove
the goat into long grass, saying, "Come, Little One Eye, we will sit
down; I will sing you something." Little One Eye sat down, being tired
from the unusual walk and from the heat of the sun, and Little Two
Eyes kept on singing, "Are you awake, Little One Eye? Are you asleep,
Little One Eye?" Then Little One Eye shut her one eye, and fell
asleep. And when Little Two Eyes saw that Little One Eye was fast
asleep, and could not betray anything, she said, "Little goat, bleat;
little table, rise," and sat herself at her table, and ate and drank
till she was satisfied; then she called out again, "Little goat,
bleat; little table, away," and instantly everything disappeared.
Little Two Eyes now woke Little One Eye, and said, "Little One Eye,
you pretend to watch, and fall asleep over it, and in the meantime the
goat could have run all over the world; come, we will go home." Then
they went home, and Little Two Eyes let her little dish again stand
untouched; and Little One Eye, who could not tell the mother why her
sister would not eat, said, as an excuse, "Oh, I fell asleep out
there."
The next day the mother said to Little Three Eyes, "This time you
shall go and see if Little Two Eyes eats out of doors, and if anyone
brings her food and drink, for she must eat and drink secretly."
Then Little Three Eyes went to Little Two Eyes, and said, "I will go
with you and see whether the goat is taken proper care of, and driven
to good pasture." But Little Two Eyes saw what Little Three Eyes had
in her mind, and drove the goat into long grass, and said as before,
"We will sit down here, Little Three Eyes; I will sing you
something." Little Three Eyes seated herself, being tired from the
walk and the heat of the sun, and Little Two Eyes began the same song
again, and sang, "Are you awake, Little Three Eyes?" But instead of
singing then as she should, "Are you asleep, Little Three Eyes?" she
sang, through carelessness, "Are you asleep, Little Two Eyes?" and
went on singing, "Are you awake, Little Three Eyes? Are you asleep,
Little Two Eyes?" So the two eyes of Little Three Eyes fell asleep,
but the third did not go to sleep, because it was not spoken to by the
verse. Little Three Eyes, to be sure, shut it, and made believe to go
to sleep, but only through slyness; for she winked with it, and could
see everything quite well. And when Little Two Eyes thought that
Little Three Eyes was fast asleep, she said her little sentence,
"Little goat, bleat; little table, rise," ate and drank heartily, and
then told the little table to go away again, "Little goat, bleat;
little table away." But Little Three Eyes had seen everything. Then
Little Two Eyes came to her, woke her, and said, "Ah! Little Three
Eyes, have you been asleep? you keep watch well! come, we will go
home." And when they got home, Little Two Eyes again did not eat, and
Little Three Eyes said to the mother, "I know why the proud thing does
not eat: when she says to the goat out there, 'Little goat, bleat;
little table, rise,' there stands a table before her, which is covered
with the very best food, much better than we have here; and when she
is satisfied, she says, 'Little goat, bleat; little table away,' and
everything is gone again; I have seen it all exactly. She put two of
my eyes to sleep with her little verse, but the one on my forehead
luckily remained awake."
Then the envious mother cried out, "Shall she be better off than we
are?" fetched a butcher's knife and stuck it into the goat's heart, so
that it fell down dead.
When Little Two Eyes saw that, she went out full of grief, seated
herself on a hillock, and wept bitter tears. All at once the wise
woman stood near her again, and said, "Little Two Eyes, why do you
cry?"
"Shall I not cry?" answered she. "The goat who every day, when I said
your little verse, laid the table so beautifully, has been killed by
my mother; now I must suffer hunger and thirst again."
The wise woman said, "Little Two Eyes, I will give you some good
advice; beg your sisters to give you the heart of the murdered goat,
and bury it in the ground before the house-door, and it will turn out
lucky for you." Then she disappeared, and Little Two Eyes went home
and said to her sisters, "Dear sisters, give me some part of my goat;
I don't ask for anything good, only give me the heart."
Then they laughed and said, "You can have that, if you do not want
anything else." Little Two Eyes took the heart, and buried it quietly
in the evening before the house-door, after the advice of the wise
Next morning, when the sisters woke, and went to the house-door
together, there stood a most wonderful splendid tree, with leaves of
silver, and fruit of gold hanging between them. Nothing more beautiful
or charming could be seen in the wide world. But they did not know how
the tree had come there in the night. Little Two Eyes alone noticed
that it had grown out of the heart of the goat, for it stood just
where she had buried it in the ground.
Then the mother said to Little One Eye, "Climb up, my child, and
gather us some fruit from the tree."
Little One Eye climbed up, but when she wanted to seize a golden
apple, the branch sprang out of her hand; this happened every time, so
that she could not gather a single apple, though she tried as much as
she could.
Then the mother said, "Little Three Eyes, do you climb up; you can see
better about you with your three eyes than Little One Eye can."
Little One Eye scrambled down, and Little Three Eyes climbed up. But
Little Three Eyes was no cleverer, and might look about her as much as
she liked--the golden apples always sprang back from her grasp. At
last the mother became impatient, and climbed up herself, but could
touch the fruit just as little as Little One Eye or Little Three Eyes;
she always grasped the empty air.
Then Little Two Eyes said, "I will go up myself; perhaps I shall
prosper better."
"You!" cried the sisters. "With your two eyes, what can you do?"
But Little Two Eyes climbed up and the golden apples did not spring
away from her, but dropped of themselves into her hand, so that she
could gather one after the other, and brought down a whole apron full.
Her mother took them from her, and instead of her sisters, Little One
Eye and Little Three Eyes, behaving better to poor Little Two Eyes for
it, they were only envious because she alone could get the fruit, and
behaved still more cruelly to her.
It happened, as they stood together by the tree, one day, that a young
knight came by.
"Quick, Little Two Eyes," cried the two sisters, "creep under, so that
we may not be ashamed of you," and threw over poor Little Two Eyes, in
a great hurry, an empty cask that stood just by the tree, and pushed
also beside her the golden apples which she had broken off.
Now, as the knight came nearer, he proved to be a handsome prince, who
stood still, admired the beautiful tree of gold and silver, and said
to the two sisters--
"To whom does this beautiful tree belong? She who gives me a branch of
it shall have whatever she wishes."
Then Little One Eye and Little Three Eyes answered that the tree was
theirs, and they would break off a branch for him. They both of them
gave themselves a great deal of trouble, but it was no use, for the
branches and fruit sprang back from them every time. Then the knight
said--
"It is very wonderful that the tree belongs to you, and yet you have
not the power of gathering anything from it."
They insisted, however, that the tree was their own property. But as
they spoke, Little Two Eyes rolled a few golden apples from under the
cask, so that they ran to the feet of the knight; for Little Two Eyes
was angry that Little One Eye and Little Three Eyes did not tell the
truth.
When the knight saw the apples he was astonished, and asked where they
came from. Little One Eye and Little Three Eyes answered that they had
another sister, who might not, however, show herself, because she had
only two eyes, like other common people. But the knight desired to see
her, and called out, "Little Two Eyes, come out." Then Little Two Eyes
came out of the cask quite comforted, and the knight was astonished at
her great beauty, and said--
"You, Little Two Eyes, can certainly gather me a branch from the
tree?"
"Yes," answered Little Two Eyes, "I can do that, for the tree belongs
to me." And she climbed up and easily broke off a branch, with its
silver leaves and golden fruit, and handed it to the knight.
Then the knight said, "Little Two Eyes, what shall I give you for it?"
"Oh," answered Little Two Eyes, "I suffer hunger and thirst, sorrow
and want, from early morning till late evening; if you would take me
with you and free me, I should be happy."
Then the knight lifted Little Two Eyes on to his horse, and took her
home to his paternal castle; there he gave her beautiful clothes,
food, and drink as much as she wanted, and because he loved her so
much he married her, and the marriage was celebrated with great joy.
Now, when Little Two Eyes was taken away by the handsome knight, the
two sisters envied her very much her happiness. "The wonderful tree
remains for us, though," thought they; "and even though we cannot
gather any fruit off it, every one will stand still before it, come to
us, and praise it." But the next morning the tree had disappeared, and
all their hopes with it.
Little Two Eyes lived happy a long time. Once two poor women came to
her at the castle and begged alms. Then Little Two Eyes looked in
their faces and recognised her sisters, Little One Eye and Little
Three Eyes, who had fallen into such poverty that they had to wander
about, and seek their bread from door to door. Little Two Eyes,
however, bade them welcome, and was very good to them, and took care
of them; for they both repented from their hearts the evil they had
done to their sister in their youth.
In the reign of the famous King Arthur, there lived, near the Land's
End of England, in the county of Cornwall, a worthy farmer, who had an
only son named Jack. Jack was a boy of a bold temper; he took pleasure
in hearing or reading stories of wizards, conjurors, giants, and
fairies; and used to listen eagerly while his father talked of the
great deeds of the brave knights of King Arthur's Round Table. When
Jack was sent to take care of the sheep and oxen in the fields, he
used to amuse himself with planning battles, sieges, and the means to
conquer or surprise a foe. He was above the common sports of children,
but hardly any one could equal him at wrestling; or, if he met with a
match for himself in strength, his skill and address always made him
the victor. In those days there lived on St. Michael's Mount, of
Cornwall, which rises out of the sea at some distance from the
mainland, a huge giant. He was eighteen feet high, and three yards
round; and his fierce and savage looks were the terror of all his
neighbors. He dwelt in a gloomy cavern on the very top of the
mountain, and used to wade over to the mainland in search of his prey.
When he came near, the people left their houses; and, after he had
glutted his appetite upon their cattle, he would throw half a dozen
oxen upon his back, and tie three times as many sheep and hogs round
his waist, and so march back to his own abode. The giant had done this
for many years, and the coast of Cornwall was greatly hurt by his
thefts, when Jack boldly resolved to destroy him. He therefore took a
horn, a shovel, a pickaxe, and a dark lantern, and, early in a long
winter's evening, he swam to the Mount. There he fell to work at once,
and before morning he had dug a pit twenty-two feet deep, and almost
as many broad. He covered it over with sticks and straw, and strewed
some of the earth over them, to make it look just like solid ground.
He then put his horn to his mouth, and blew such a loud and long
tantivy, that the giant awoke, and came towards Jack, roaring like
thunder: "You saucy villain, you shall pay dearly for breaking my
rest; I will broil you for my breakfast." He had scarcely spoken these
words, when he came advancing one step further; but then he tumbled
headlong into the pit, and his fall shook the very mountain.
"O ho, Mr. Giant!" said Jack, looking into the pit, "have you found
your way so soon to the bottom? How is your appetite now? Will nothing
serve you for breakfast this cold morning but broiling poor Jack?"
The giant now tried to rise, but Jack struck him a blow on the crown
of the head with his pickaxe, which killed him at once. Jack then made
haste back, to rejoice his friends with the news of the giant's
death. When the justices of Cornwall heard of this valiant action,
they sent for Jack, and declared that he should always be called Jack
the Giant Killer; and they also gave him a sword and belt, upon which
was written, in letters of gold:--
    "This is the valiant Cornishman
    Who slew the giant Cormoran."
The news of Jack's exploits soon spread over the western parts of
England: and another giant, called Old Blunderbore, vowed to have
revenge on Jack, if it should ever be his fortune to get him into his
power. The giant kept an enchanted castle in the midst of a lonely
wood. About four months after the death of Cormoran, as Jack was
taking a journey into Wales, he passed through this wood; and, as he
was very weary, he sat down to rest by the side of a pleasant
fountain, and there he fell into a deep sleep. The giant came to the
fountain for water just at this time, and found Jack there; and as the
lines on Jack's belt showed who he was, the giant lifted him up and
laid him gently upon his shoulder, to carry him to his castle; but, as
he passed through the thicket, the rustling of the leaves waked Jack;
and he was sadly afraid when he found himself in the clutches of
Blunderbore. Yet this was nothing to his fright soon after; for, when
they reached the castle, he beheld the floor covered all over with the
skulls and bones of men and women. The giant took him into a large
room, where lay the hearts and limbs of persons who had been lately
killed; and he told Jack, with a horrid grin, that men's hearts, eaten
with pepper and vinegar, were his nicest food, and also, that he
thought he should make a dainty meal on his heart. When he had said
this, he locked Jack up in that room, while he went to fetch another
giant, who lived in the same wood, to enjoy a dinner off Jack's flesh
with him. While he was away, Jack heard dreadful shrieks, groans, and
cries from many parts of the castle; and soon after he heard a
mournful voice repeat these lines:--
    "Haste, valiant stranger, haste away,
    Lest you become the giant's prey.
    On his return he'll bring another,
    Still more savage than his brother;
    A horrid, cruel monster, who,
    Before he kills, will torture you.
    Oh valiant stranger! haste away,
    Or you'll become these giants' prey."
This warning was so shocking to poor Jack, that he was ready to go
mad. He ran to the window, and saw the two giants coming along arm in
arm. This window was right over the gates of the castle. "Now,"
thought Jack, "either my death or freedom is at hand."
There were two strong cords in the room. Jack made a large noose, with
a slip-knot at the ends of both these, and, as the giants were coming
through the gates, he threw the ropes over their heads. He then made
the other ends fast to a beam in the ceiling, and pulled with all his
might, till he had almost strangled them. When he saw that they were
both quite black in the face, and had not the least strength left, he
drew his sword, and slid down the ropes; he then killed the giants,
and thus saved himself from a cruel death. Jack next took a great
bunch of keys from the pocket of Blunderbore, and went into the castle
again. He made a strict search through all the rooms, and in them
found three ladies tied up by the hair of their heads, and almost
starved to death. They told him that their husbands had been killed by
the giants, who had then condemned them to be starved to death,
because they would not eat the flesh of their own dead husbands.
"Ladies," said Jack, "I have put an end to the monster and his wicked
brother; and I give you this castle and all the riches it contains, to
make you some amends for the dreadful pains you have felt." He then
very politely gave them the keys of the castle, and went further on
his journey to Wales.
As Jack had not taken any of the giant's riches for himself, and had
very little money of his own, he thought it best to travel as fast as
he could. At length he lost his way; and, when night came on, he was
in a lonely valley between two lofty mountains. There he walked about
for some hours, without seeing any dwelling-place, so he thought
himself very lucky at last in finding a large and handsome house. He
went up to it boldly, and knocked loudly at the gate; when, to his
great terror and surprise, there came forth a monstrous giant with two
heads. He spoke to Jack very civilly, for he was a Welsh giant, and
all the mischief he did was by private and secret malice, under the
show of friendship and kindness. Jack told him that he was a traveller
who had lost his way, on which the huge monster made him welcome, and
led him into a room, where there was a good bed in which to pass the
night. Jack took off his clothes quickly; but though he was so weary,
he could not go to sleep. Soon after this, he heard the giant walking
backward and forward in the next room, and saying to himself:--
    "Though here you lodge with me this night,
    You shall not see the morning light;
    My club shall dash your brains out quite."
"Say you so?" thought Jack. "Are these your tricks upon travellers?
But I hope to prove as cunning as you." Then getting out of bed, he
groped about the room, and at last found a large thick billet of wood;
he laid it in his own place in the bed, and hid himself in a dark
corner of the room. In the middle of the night the giant came with his
great club, and struck many heavy blows on the bed, in the very place
where Jack had laid the billet, and then he went back to his own room,
thinking he had broken all his bones. Early in the morning, Jack put a
bold face upon the matter, and walked into the giant's room to thank
him for his lodging.
The giant started when he saw him, and he began to stammer out, "Oh,
dear me! is it you? Pray how did you sleep last night? Did you hear or
see anything in the dead of the night?"
"Nothing worth speaking of," said Jack, carelessly; "a rat, I
believe, gave me three or four slaps with his tail, and disturbed me a
little, but I soon went to sleep again."
The giant wondered more and more at this; yet he did not answer a
word, and went to bring two great bowls of hasty-pudding for their
breakfast.
Jack wished to make the giant believe that he could eat as much as
himself; so he contrived to button a leathern bag inside his coat, and
slipped the hasty-pudding into this bag, while he seemed to put it
into his mouth. When breakfast was over, he said to the giant, "Now I
will show you a fine trick; I can cure all wounds with a touch; I
could cut off my head one minute, and the next put it sound again on
my shoulders: you shall see an example." He then took hold of the
knife, ripped up the leathern bag, and all the hasty-pudding tumbled
out upon the floor.
"Ods splutter hur nails," cried the Welsh giant, who was ashamed to be
outdone by such a little fellow as Jack; "hur can do that hurself." So
he snatched up the knife, plunged it into his stomach, and in a moment
dropped down dead.
As soon as Jack had thus tricked the Welsh monster, he went farther on
his journey; and, a few days after, he met with King Arthur's only
son, who had got his father's leave to travel into Wales, to deliver a
beautiful lady from the power of a wicked magician, by whom she was
held in enchantment. When Jack found that the young prince had no
servants with him, he begged leave to attend him; and the prince at
once agreed to this, and gave Jack many thanks for his kindness.
King Arthur's son was a handsome, polite, and brave knight, and so
good-natured, that he gave money to everybody he met. At length he
gave his last penny to an old woman, and then turned to Jack, "How
shall we be able to get food for ourselves the rest of our journey?"
"Leave that to me, sir," replied Jack; "I will provide for my prince."
Night now came on, and the prince began to grow uneasy at thinking
where they should lodge.
"Sir," said Jack, "be of good heart; two miles further there lives a
large giant, whom I know well; he has three heads, and will fight five
hundred men, and make them fly before him."
"Alas!" cried the king's son, "we had better never have been born than
meet with such a monster."
"My lord, leave me to manage him, and wait here in quiet till I
return."
The prince now stayed behind, while Jack rode on at full speed; and
when he came to the gates of the castle, he gave a loud knock. The
giant, with a voice like thunder, roared out, "Who is there?"
Jack made answer, and said, "No one but your poor cousin Jack."
"Well," said the giant, "what news, cousin Jack?"
"Dear uncle," said Jack, "I have heavy news."
"Pooh!" said the giant, "what heavy news can come to me? I am a giant
with three heads, and can fight five hundred men, and make them fly
"Alas!" said Jack, "here's the king's son coming with two thousand men
to kill you, and to destroy the castle and all that you have."
"Oh, cousin Jack," said the giant, "this is heavy news indeed! But I
have a large cellar underground, where I will hide myself, and you
shall lock, bolt, and bar me in, and keep the keys till the king's son
is gone."
Now, when Jack had barred the giant fast in the vault, he went back
and fetched the prince to the castle; they both made themselves merry
with the wine and other dainties that were in the house. So that night
they rested very pleasantly while the poor giant lay trembling and
shaking with fear in the cellar underground. Early in the morning,
Jack gave the king's son gold and silver out of the giant's treasure,
and accompanied him three miles forward on his journey. The prince
then sent Jack to let his uncle out of the hole, who asked him what he
should give him as a reward for saving his castle.
"Why, good uncle," said Jack, "I desire nothing but the old coat and
cap, with the old rusty sword and slippers, which are hanging at your
bed's head."
"Then," said the giant, "you shall have them: and pray keep them for
my sake, for they are things of great use. The coat will keep you
invisible, the cap will give you knowledge, the sword will cut
through anything, and the shoes are of vast swiftness; they may be
useful to you in all times of danger, so take them with all my heart."
Jack gave many thanks to the giant, and then set off to the prince.
When he had come up to the king's son, they soon arrived at the
dwelling of the beautiful lady, who was under the power of a wicked
magician. She received the prince very politely, and made a noble
feast for him: when it was ended, she rose, and, wiping her mouth with
a fine handkerchief, said, "My lord, you must submit to the custom of
my palace; to-morrow morning I command you to tell me on whom I bestow
this handkerchief, or lose your head." She then left the room.
The young prince went to bed very mournful, but Jack put on his cap of
knowledge, which told him that the lady was forced, by the power of
enchantment, to meet the wicked magician every night in the middle of
the forest. Jack now put on his coat of darkness, and his shoes of
swiftness, and was there before her. When the lady came, she gave the
handkerchief to the magician. Jack, with his sword of sharpness, at
one blow cut off his head; the enchantment was then ended in a moment,
and the lady was restored to her former virtue and goodness. She was
married to the prince on the next day, and soon after went back, with
her royal husband and a great company, to the court of King Arthur,
where they were received with loud and joyful welcomes; and the
valiant hero Jack, for the many great exploits he had done for the
good of his country, was made one of the knights of the Round Table.
As Jack had been so lucky in all his adventures, he resolved not to be
idle for the future, but still to do what services he could for the
honour of the king and the nation. He therefore humbly begged his
majesty to furnish him with a horse and money, that he might travel in
search of new and strange exploits. "For," said he to the king, "there
are many giants yet living in the remote parts of Wales, to the great
terror and distress of your majesty's subjects; therefore, if it
please you, sire, to favour me in my design, I will soon rid your
kingdom of these giants and monsters in human shape."
Now when the king heard this offer, and began to think of the cruel
deeds of these blood-thirsty giants and savage monsters, he gave Jack
everything proper for such a journey. After this, Jack took leave of
the king, the prince, and all the knights, and set off; taking with
him his cap of knowledge, his sword of sharpness, his shoes of
swiftness, and his invisible coat, the better to perform the great
exploits that might fall in his way. He went along over hills and
mountains; and on the third day he came to a wide forest. He had
hardly entered it, when on a sudden he heard dreadful shrieks and
cries; and forcing his way through the trees, saw a monstrous giant
dragging along by the hair of their heads, a handsome knight and a
beautiful lady. Their tears and cries melted the heart of honest
Jack; he alighted from his horse, and tying him to an oak-tree, put on
his invisible coat, under which he carried his sword of sharpness.
When he came up to the giant, he made several strokes at him, but
could not reach his body, on account of the enormous height of the
terrible creature; but he wounded his thighs in several places; and at
length, putting both hands to his sword, and aiming with all his
might, he cut off both the giant's legs just below the garter; and the
trunk of his body, tumbling to the ground, made not only the trees
shake, but the earth itself tremble with the force of his fall. Then
Jack, setting his foot upon his neck, exclaimed: "Thou barbarous and
savage wretch, behold, I come to execute upon thee the just reward for
all thy crimes;" and instantly plunged his sword into the giant's
body. The huge monster gave a groan, and yielded up his life into the
hands of the victorious Jack the Giant-Killer, whilst the noble knight
and the virtuous lady were both joyful spectators of his sudden death.
They not only returned Jack hearty thanks for their deliverance, but
also invited him to their house, to refresh himself after his dreadful
encounter, as likewise to receive a reward for his good services.
"No," said Jack, "I cannot be at ease till I find out the den that was
the monster's habitation."
The knight, on hearing this, grew very sorrowful, and replied: "Noble
stranger, it is too much to run a second hazard; this monster lived
in a den under yonder mountain, with a brother of his, more fierce and
cruel than himself; therefore, if you should go thither, and perish in
the attempt, it would be a heart-breaking thing to me and my lady; so
let me persuade you to go back with us, and desist from any further
pursuit."
"Nay," answered Jack, "if there be another, even if there were twenty,
I would shed the last drop of blood in my body before one of them
should escape. When I have finished this task, I will come and pay my
respects to you."
So when they had told him where to find them again, he got on his
horse and went after the dead giant's brother.
Jack had not ridden a mile and a half before he came in sight of the
mouth of the cavern; and, nigh the entrance of it, he saw the other
giant sitting on a huge block of timber, with a knotted iron club
lying by his side, waiting for his brother. His eyes looked like
flames of fire, his face was grim and ugly, and his cheeks were like
two flitches of bacon; the bristles of his beard seemed to be thick
rods of iron wire; and his long locks of hair hung down upon his broad
shoulders like curling snakes. Jack got down from his horse, and
turned him into a thicket; then he put on his coat of darkness, and
drew a little nearer to behold this figure, and said softly, "Oh,
monster! are you there? It will not be long before I shall take you
fast by the beard."
The giant all this while could not see him, by reason of his invisible
coat; so Jack came quite close to him, and struck a blow at his head
with his sword of sharpness; but he missed his aim, and only cut off
his nose, which made him roar like loud claps of thunder. He rolled
his glaring eyes round on every side, but could not see who had given
him the blow; so he took up his iron club, and began to lay about him
like one that was mad with pain and fury.
"Nay," said Jack, "if this be the case, I will kill you at once." So
saying, he slipped nimbly behind him, and jumping upon the block of
timber, as the giant rose from it, he stabbed him in the back; when,
after a few howls, he dropped down dead. Jack cut off his head, and
sent it, with the head of his brother, to King Arthur, by a waggon
which he had hired for that purpose. When Jack had thus killed these
two monsters, he went into their cave in search of their treasure. He
passed through many turnings and windings, which led him to a room
paved with freestone; at the end of it was a boiling cauldron, and on
the right hand stood a large table, where the giants used to dine. He
then came to a window that was secured with iron bars, through which
he saw a number of wretched captives, who cried out when they saw
Jack: "Alas! alas! young man, you are come to be one among us in this
horrid den."
"I hope," said Jack, "you will not stay here long: but pray tell me
what is the meaning of your being here at all?"
"Alas!" said one poor old man, "I will tell you, sir. We are persons
that have been taken by the giants who hold this cave, and are kept
till they choose to have a feast; then one of us is to be killed, and
cooked to please their taste. It is not long since they took three for
the same purpose."
"Well," said Jack, "I have given them such a dinner, that it will be
long enough before they have any more."
The captives were amazed at his words.
"You may believe me," said Jack, "for I have killed them both with the
edge of this sword, and have sent their large heads to the court of
King Arthur, as marks of my great success."
To show that what he said was true, he unlocked the gate, and set the
captives all free. Then he led them to the great room, placed them
round the table, and placed before them two quarters of beef, with
bread and wine; upon which they feasted their fill. When supper was
over, they searched the giant's coffers, and Jack divided among them
all the treasures. The next morning they set off to their homes, and
Jack to the knight's house, whom he had left with his lady not long
He was received with the greatest joy by the thankful knight and his
lady, who, in honour of Jack's exploits, gave a grand feast, to which
all the nobles and gentry were invited. When the company were
assembled, the knight declared to them the great actions of Jack, and
gave him, as a mark of respect, a fine ring, on which was engraved the
picture of the giant dragging the knight and the lady by the hair,
with this motto round it:--
    "Behold in dire distress were we,
      Under a giant's fierce command;
    But gained our lives and liberty
      From valiant Jack's victorious hand."
Among the guests then present were five aged gentlemen, who were
fathers to some of those captives who had been freed by Jack from the
dungeon of the giants. As soon as they heard that he was the person
who had done such wonders, they pressed round him with tears of joy,
to return him thanks for the happiness he had caused them. After this
the bowl went round, and every one drank the health and long life of
the gallant hero. Mirth increased, and the hall was filled with peals
of laughter. But, on a sudden, a herald, pale and breathless, rushed
into the midst of the company, and told them that Thundel, a savage
giant with two heads, had heard of the death of his two kinsmen, and
was come to take his revenge on Jack; and that he was now within a
mile of the house, the people flying before him like chaff before the
wind. At this news the very boldest of the guests trembled; but Jack
drew his sword, and said, "Let him come, I have a rod for him also.
Pray, ladies and gentlemen, do me the favour to walk into the garden,
and you shall soon behold the giant's defeat and death."
To this they all agreed, and heartily wished him success in his
dangerous attempt.
The knight's house stood in the middle of a moat, thirty feet deep and
twenty wide, over which lay a drawbridge. Jack set men to work, to cut
the bridge on both sides, almost to the middle, and then dressed
himself in his coat of darkness, and went against the giant with his
sword of sharpness. As he came close to him, though the giant could
not see him for his invisible coat, yet he found some danger was near,
which made him cry out:--
    "Fa, fe, fi, fo, fum,
    I smell the blood of an Englishman;
    Let him be alive, or let him be dead,
    I'll grind his bones to make me bread."
"Say you so, my friend?" said Jack; "you are a monstrous miller,
"Art thou," cried the giant, "the villain that killed my kinsmen? Then
I will tear thee with my teeth, and grind thy bones to powder."
"You must catch me first," said Jack; and throwing off his coat of
darkness, and putting on his shoes of swiftness, he began to run, the
giant following him like a walking castle, making the earth shake at
every step.
Jack led him round and round the walls of the house, that the company
might see the monster; then, to finish the work, he ran over the
drawbridge, the giant going after him with his club: but when he came
to the middle, where the bridge had been cut on both sides, the great
weight of his body made it break, and he tumbled into the water, where
he rolled about like a large whale. Jack now stood by the side of the
moat, and laughed and jeered at him, saying, "I think you told me you
would grind my bones to powder; when will you begin?"
The giant foamed at both his horrid mouths with fury, and plunged
from side to side of the moat; but he could not get out to have
revenge on his little foe. At last Jack ordered a cart-rope to be
brought to him; he then drew it over his two heads, and by the help of
a team of horses, dragged him to the edge of the moat, where he cut
off his heads: and before he either ate or drank, sent them both to
the court of King Arthur. He then went back to the table with the
company, and the rest of the day was spent in mirth and good cheer.
After staying with the knight for some time, Jack grew weary of such
an idle life, and set out again in search of new adventures. He went
over hills and dales without meeting any, till he came to the foot of
a very high mountain. Here he knocked at the door of a small and
lonely house, and an old man, with a head as white as snow, let him
in.
"Good father," said Jack, "can you lodge a traveller who has lost his
way?"
"Yes," said the hermit, "I can, if you will accept such fare as my
poor house affords."
Jack entered, and the old man set before him some bread and fruit for
his supper. When Jack had eaten as much as he chose, the hermit said:
"My son, I know you are the famous conqueror of giants; now, at the
top of this mountain is an enchanted castle, kept by a giant named
Galligantus, who, by the help of a vile magician, gets many knights
into his castle, where he changes them into the shape of beasts. Above
all, I lament the hard fate of a duke's daughter, whom they seized as
she was walking in her father's garden, and brought hither through the
air in a chariot drawn by two fiery dragons, and turned her into the
shape of a deer. Many knights have tried to destroy the enchantment
and deliver her, yet none have been able to do it, by reason of two
fiery griffins, who guard the gate of the castle, and destroy all who
come nigh; but as you, my son, have an invisible coat, you may pass by
them without being seen; and on the gates of the castle you will find
engraved by what means the enchantment may be broken."
Jack promised that in the morning, at the risk of his life, he would
break the enchantment; and after a sound sleep, he arose early, put on
his invisible coat, and got ready for the attempt. When he had climbed
to the top of the mountain, he saw the two fiery griffins; but he
passed between them without the least fear of danger for they could
not see him because of his invisible coat. On the castle-gate he found
a golden trumpet, under which were written these lines:--
    "Whoever can this trumpet blow,
    Shall cause the giant's overthrow."
As soon as Jack had read this, he seized the trumpet, and blew a
shrill blast, which made the gates fly open, and the very castle
itself tremble. The giant and the conjuror now knew that their wicked
course was at an end, and they stood biting their thumbs and shaking
with fear. Jack with his sword of sharpness, soon killed the giant,
and the magician was then carried away by a whirlwind. All the
knights and beautiful ladies, who had been changed into birds and
beasts, returned to their proper shapes. The castle vanished away like
smoke, and the head of the giant Galligantus was sent to King Arthur.
The knights and ladies rested that night at the old man's hermitage,
and the next day they set out for the court. Jack then went up to the
king, and gave his majesty an account of all his fierce battles.
Jack's fame had spread through the whole country; and at the king's
desire, the duke gave him his daughter in marriage, to the joy of all
the kingdom. After this, the king gave him a large estate, on which he
and his lady lived the rest of their days in joy and content.
TOM THUMB.
In the days of King Arthur, Merlin, the most learned enchanter of his
time, was on a journey; and being very weary, stopped one day at the
cottage of an honest ploughman to ask for refreshment. The ploughman's
wife, with great civility, immediately brought him some milk in a
wooden bowl, and some brown bread on a wooden platter. Merlin could
not help observing, that although everything within the cottage was
particularly neat and clean, and in good order, the ploughman and his
wife had the most sorrowful air imaginable: so he questioned them on
the cause of their melancholy, and learned that they were very
miserable because they had no children. The poor woman declared, with
tears in her eyes, that she should be the happiest creature in the
world, if she had a son, although he were no bigger than his father's
thumb. Merlin was much amused with the notion of a boy no bigger than
a man's thumb; and as soon as he returned home, he sent for the queen
of the fairies (with whom he was very intimate), and related to her
the desire of the ploughman and his wife to have a son the size of his
father's thumb. She liked the plan exceedingly, and declared their
wish should be speedily granted. Accordingly, the ploughman's wife
had a son, who in a few minutes grew as tall as his father's thumb.
The queen of the fairies came in at the window as the mother was
sitting up in bed admiring the child. Her majesty kissed the infant,
and, giving it the name of Tom Thumb, immediately summoned several
fairies from Fairyland, to clothe her new little favourite:--
    "An oak-leaf hat he had for his crown,
    His shirt it was by spiders spun:
    With doublet wove of thistledown,
    His trousers up with points were done;
    His stockings, of apple-rind, they tie
    With eye-lash pluck'd from his mother's eye:
    His shoes were made of a mouse's skin,
    Nicely tann'd with hair within."
Tom was never any bigger than his father's thumb, which was not a
large thumb neither; but as he grew older, he became very cunning, for
which his mother did not sufficiently correct him: and by this ill
quality he was often brought into difficulties. For instance, when he
had learned to play with other boys for cherry-stones, and had lost
all his own, he used to creep into the boys' bags, fill his pockets,
and come out again to play. But one day as he was getting out of a bag
of cherry-stones, the boy to whom it belonged chanced to see him.
"Ah, ha, my little Tom Thumb!" said he, "have I caught you at your bad
tricks at last? Now I will reward you for thieving." Then drawing the
string tight round his neck, and shaking the bag, the cherry-stones
bruised Tom's legs, thighs, and body sadly; which made him beg to be
let out, and promise never to be guilty of such things any more.
Shortly afterwards Tom's mother was making a batter-pudding, and that
he might see how she mixed it, he climbed on the edge of the bowl; but
his foot happening to slip, he fell over head and ears into the
batter, and his mother, not observing him, stirred him into the
pudding, and popped him into the pot to boil. The hot water made Tom
kick and struggle; and his mother, seeing the pudding jump up and down
in such a furious manner, thought it was bewitched; and a tinker
coming by just at the time, she quickly gave him the pudding; he put
it into his budget, and walked on.
As soon as Tom could get the batter out of his mouth, he began to cry
aloud, which so frightened the poor tinker, that he flung the pudding
over the hedge, and ran away from it as fast as he could. The pudding
being broken to pieces by the fall, Tom was released, and walked home
to his mother, who gave him a kiss and put him to bed.
Tom Thumb's mother once took him with her when she went to milk the
cow; and it being a very windy day, she tied him with a needleful of
thread to a thistle, that he might not be blown away. The cow, liking
his oak-leaf hat, took him and the thistle up at one mouthful. While
the cow chewed the thistle, Tom, terrified at her great teeth, which
seemed ready to crush him to pieces, roared, "Mother, mother!" as loud
as he could bawl.
"Where are you, Tommy, my dear Tommy?' said the mother.
"Here, mother, here in the red cow's mouth."
The mother began to cry and wring her hands; but the cow, surprised at
such odd noises in her throat, opened her mouth and let him drop out.
His mother clapped him into her apron, and ran home with him. Tom's
father made him a whip of a barley straw to drive the cattle with, and
being one day in the field he slipped into a deep furrow. A raven
flying over picked him up with a grain of corn, and flew with him to
the top of a giant's castle by the sea-side, where he left him; and
old Grumbo, the giant, coming soon after to walk upon his terrace,
swallowed Tom like a pill, clothes and all. Tom presently made the
giant very uncomfortable, and he threw him up into the sea. A great
fish then swallowed him. This fish was soon after caught, and sent as
a present to King Arthur. When it was cut open, everybody was
delighted with little Tom Thumb. The king made him his dwarf; he was
the favourite of the whole court; and, by his merry pranks, often
amused the queen and the knights of the Round Table. The king, when he
rode on horseback, frequently took Tom in his hand; and if a shower of
rain came on, he used to creep into the king's waist-coat-pocket, and
sleep till the rain was over. The king also sometimes questioned Tom
concerning his parents; and when Tom informed his majesty they were
very poor people, the king led him into his treasury, and told him he
should pay his friends a visit, and take with him as much money as he
could carry. Tom procured a little purse, and putting a threepenny
piece into it, with much labour and difficulty got it upon his back;
and after travelling two days and nights, arrived at his father's
house. His mother met him at the door, almost tired to death, having
in forty-eight hours travelled almost half a mile with a huge silver
threepence upon his back. Both his parents were glad to see him,
especially when he had brought such an amazing sum of money with him.
They placed him in a walnut-shell by the fireside, and feasted him for
three days upon a hazel-nut, which made him sick, for a whole nut
usually served him for a month. Tom got well, but could not travel
because it had rained: therefore his mother took him in her hand, and
with one puff blew him into King Arthur's court; where Tom entertained
the king, queen, and nobility at tilts and tournaments, at which he
exerted himself so much that he brought on a fit of sickness, and his
life was despaired of. At this juncture the queen of the fairies came
in a chariot, drawn by flying mice, placed Tom by her side, and drove
through the air, without stopping till they arrived at her palace;
when, after restoring him to health and permitting him to enjoy all
the gay diversions of Fairyland, she commanded a fair wind, and,
placing Tom before it, blew him straight to the court of King Arthur.
But just as Tom should have alighted in the courtyard of the palace,
the cook happened to pass along with the king's great bowl of
furmenty (King Arthur loved furmenty), and poor Tom Thumb fell plump
into the middle of it, and splashed the hot furmenty into the cook's
eyes. Down went the bowl.
"Oh dear! oh dear!" cried Tom.
"Murder! murder!" bellowed the cook; and away poured the king's nice
furmenty into the kennel.
The cook was a red-faced, cross fellow, and swore to the king that Tom
had done it out of mere mischief; so he was taken up, tried, and
sentenced to be beheaded. Tom hearing this dreadful sentence, and
seeing a miller stand by with his mouth wide open, he took a good
spring, and jumped down the miller's throat, unperceived by all, even
by the miller himself.
Tom being lost, the court broke up, and away went the miller to his
mill. But Tom did not leave him long at rest: he began to roll and
tumble about, so that the miller thought himself bewitched, and sent
for a doctor. When the doctor came, Tom began to dance and sing; the
doctor was as much frightened as the miller, and sent in great haste
for five more doctors and twenty learned men. While all these were
debating upon the affair, the miller (for they were very tedious)
happened to yawn, and Tom, taking the opportunity, made another jump,
and alighted on his feet in the middle of the table. The miller,
provoked to be thus tormented by such a little creature, fell into a
great passion, caught hold of Tom, and threw him out of the window
into the river. A large salmon swimming by snapped him up in a minute.
The salmon was soon caught and sold in the market to a steward of a
lord. The lord, thinking it an uncommon fine fish, made a present of
it to the king, who ordered it to be dressed immediately. When the
cook cut open the salmon, he found poor Tom, and ran with him directly
to the king; but the king, being busy with state affairs, desired that
he might be brought another day. The cook resolving to keep him safely
this time, as he had so lately given him the slip, clapped him into a
mouse-trap, and left him to amuse himself by peeping through the wires
for a whole week; when the king sent for him, he forgave him for
throwing down the furmenty, ordered him new clothes, and knighted
him:--
    "His shirt was made of butterflies' wings,
    His boots were made of chicken skins;
    His coat and breeches were made with pride:
    A tailor's needle hung by his side;
    A mouse for a horse he used to ride."
Thus dressed and mounted, he rode a-hunting with the king and
nobility, who all laughed heartily at Tom and his fine prancing steed.
As they rode by a farmhouse one day, a cat jumped from behind the
door, seized the mouse and little Tom, and began to devour the mouse;
however, Tom boldly drew his sword and attacked the cat, who then let
him fall. The king and his nobles, seeing Tom falling, went to his
assistance, and one of the lords caught him in his hat; but poor Tom
was sadly scratched, and his clothes were torn by the claws of the
cat. In this condition he was carried home, when a bed of down was
made for him in a little ivory cabinet. The queen of the fairies came
and took him again to Fairyland, where she kept him for some years;
and then, dressing him in bright green, sent him flying once more
through the air to the earth, in the days of King Thunstone. The
people flocked far and near to look at him; and the king, before whom
he was carried, asked him who he was, whence he came, and where he
lived? Tom answered:--
    "My name Is Tom Thumb,
    From the Fairies I come;
    When King Arthur shone,
    This court was my home.
    In me he delighted,
    By him I was knighted;
    Did you never hear of
    Sir Thomas Thumb?"
The king was so charmed with this address, that he ordered a little
chair to be made, in order that Tom might sit on his table, and also a
palace of gold a span high, with a door an inch wide, for little Tom
to live in. He also gave him a coach drawn by six small mice, This
made the queen angry, because she had not a new coach too: therefore,
resolving to ruin Tom, she complained to the king that he had behaved
very insolently to her. The king sent for him in a rage. Tom, to
escape his fury, crept into an empty snail-shell, and there lay till
he was almost starved; when, peeping out of the hole, he saw a fine
butterfly settle on the ground: he now ventured out, and getting
astride, the butterfly took wing, and mounted into the air with
little Tom on his back. Away he flew from field to field, from tree to
tree, till at last he flew to the king's court. The king, queen, and
nobles, all strove to catch the butterfly, but could not. At length
poor Tom, having neither bridle nor saddle, slipped from his seat, and
fell into a watering-pot, where he was found almost drowned. The queen
vowed he should be guillotined; but while the guillotine was getting
ready, he was secured once more in a mouse-trap; when the cat, seeing
something stir, and supposing it to be a mouse, patted the trap about
till she broke it, and set Tom at liberty. Soon afterwards a spider,
taking him for a fly, made at him. Tom drew his sword and fought
valiantly, but the spider's poisonous breath overcame him:--
    "He fell dead on the ground where late he had stood,
    And the spider suck'd up the last drop of his blood."
King Thunstone and his whole court went into mourning for little Tom
Thumb. They buried him under a rosebush, and raised a nice white
marble monument over his grave, with the following epitaph:--
    "Here lies Tom Thumb, King Arthur's knight,
    Who died by a spider's cruel bite.
    He was well known in Arthur's court,
    Where he afforded gallant sport;
    He rode at tilt and tournament,
    And on a mouse a-hunting went;
    Alive he fill'd the court with mirth,
    His death to sorrow soon gave birth.
    Wipe, wipe your eyes, and shake your head,
    And cry, 'Alas! Tom Thumb is dead.'"
RUMPELSTILZCHEN.
There was once a miller who was very poor, but he had a beautiful
daughter. Now, it happened that he came to speak to the king, and, to
give himself importance, he said to him, "I have a daughter who can
spin straw into gold."
The king said to the miller, "That is a talent that pleases me well;
if she be as skilful as you say, bring her to-morrow to the palace,
and I will put her to the proof."
When the maiden was brought to him, he led her to a room full of
straw, gave her a wheel and spindle, and said, "Now set to work, and
if by the morrow this straw be not spun into gold, you shall die." He
locked the door, and left the maiden alone.
The poor girl sat down disconsolate, and could not for her life think
what she was to do; for she knew not--how could she?--the way to spin
straw into gold; and her distress increased so much that at last she
began to weep. All at once the door opened, and a little man entered,
and said, "Good evening, my pretty miller's daughter why are you
weeping so bitterly?"
"Ah!" answered the maiden, "I must spin straw into gold, and know not
how to do it."
The little man said, "What will you give me if I do it for you?"
"My neckerchief," said the maiden.
He took the kerchief, sat down before the wheel, and grind, grind,
grind--three times did he grind--and the spindle was full: then he put
another thread on, and grind, grind, grind, the second was full; so he
spun on till morning; when all the straw was spun, and all the
spindles were full of gold.
The king came at sunrise, and was greatly astonished and overjoyed at
the sight; but it only made his heart the more greedy of gold. He put
the miller's daughter into another much larger room, full of straw,
and ordered her to spin it all in one night, if life were dear to her.
The poor helpless maiden began to weep, when once more the door flew
open, the little man appeared, and said, "What will you give me if I
spin this straw into gold?"
"My ring from my finger," answered the maiden.
The little man took the ring, began to turn the wheel, and, by the
morning, all the straw was spun into shining gold.
The king was highly delighted when he saw it, but was not yet
satisfied with the quantity of gold; so he put the damsel into a still
larger room, full of straw, and said, "Spin this during the night; and
if you do it, you shall be my wife." "For," he thought, "if she's only
a miller's daughter I shall never find a richer wife in the whole
As soon as the damsel was alone, the little man came the third time,
and said, "What will you give me if I again spin all this straw for
"I have nothing more to give you," answered the girl.
"Then promise, if you become queen, to give me your first child."
"Who knows how that may be, or how things may turn out between now and
then?" thought the girl, but in her perplexity she could not help
herself: so she promised the little man what he desired, and he spun
all the straw into gold.
When the king came in the morning, and saw that his orders had been
obeyed, he married the maiden, and the beautiful miller's daughter
became a queen. After a year had passed she brought a lovely baby into
the world, but quite forgot the little man, till he walked suddenly
into her chamber, and said, "Give me what you promised me." The queen
was frightened, and offered the dwarf all the riches of the kingdom if
he would only leave her her child; but he answered, "No; something
living is dearer to me than all the treasures of the world."
Then the queen began to grieve and to weep so bitterly, that the
little man took pity upon her and said, "I will give you three days;
if in that time you can find out my name, you shall keep the child."
All night long the queen thought over every name she had ever heard,
and sent a messenger through the kingdom, to inquire what names were
usually given to people in that country. When, next day, the little
man came again, she began with Caspar, Melchoir, Balthazar, and
repeated, each after each, all the names she knew or had heard of; but
at each one the little man said, "That is not my name."
The second day she again sent round about in all directions, to ask
how the people were called, and repeated to the little man the
strangest names she could hear of or imagine: to each he answered
always, "That is not my name."
The third day the messenger returned and said, "I have not been able
to find a single new name; but as I came over a high mountain by a
wood, where the fox and the hare bid each other good-night, I saw a
little house, and before the house was burning a little fire, and
round the fire danced a very funny little man, who hopped upon one
leg, and cried out:--
    "To-day I brew, to-morrow I bake,
    Next day the queen's child I shall take;
    How glad I am that nobody knows
    My name is Rumpelstilzchen!"
You may guess how joyful the queen was at hearing this; and when, soon
after, the little man entered and said, "Queen, what is my name?" she
asked him mischievously, "Is your name Kunz?"
"No."
"Is your name Carl?"
"Are you not sometimes called Rumpelstilzchen?"
"A witch has told you that--a witch has told you!" shrieked the poor
little man, and stamped so furiously with his right foot that it sunk
into the earth up to the hip; then he seized his left foot with both
hands with such violence, that he tore himself right in two.
FORTUNATUS.
In the city of Famagosta, in the island of Cyprus, there lived a very
rich gentleman. His name was Theodorus: he married a lady who was the
greatest beauty in Cyprus, and she was as rich as himself; she was
called Graciana. They both had every pleasure that wealth could buy,
and lived in the first style. Besides all this, the lady Graciana
brought her husband a fine little son, who was named Fortunatus; so
one would think nothing could have kept Theodorus from being the most
happy person in the world. But this was not long the case; for when he
had enjoyed all these pleasures for some time, he grew tired of them,
and began to keep company with young noblemen of the court, with whom
he sat up all night drinking and playing cards, so that in a few years
he spent all his fortune. He was now very sorry for what he had done,
but it was too late; and there was nothing he could do, but to work at
some trade to support his wife and child. For all this the lady
Graciana never found fault with him, but still loved her husband the
same as before; saying, "Dear Theodorus, to be sure I do not know how
to work at any trade; but if I can not help you in earning money, I
will help you to save it." So Theodorus set to work; and though the
lady Graciana had always been used only to ring her bell for
everything that she wanted, she now scoured the kettles and washed the
clothes with her own hands.
They went on in this manner till Fortunatus was sixteen years of age.
When that time came, one day, as they were all sitting at dinner,
Theodorus fixed his eyes on his son, and sighed deeply.
"What is the matter with you, father?" said Fortunatus.
"Ah! my child," said Theodorus, "I have reason enough to be sorry,
when I think of the noble fortune which I have spent, and that my
folly will force you to labour for your living."
"Father," replied Fortunatus, "do not grieve about it. I have often
thought that it was time I should do something for myself; and though
I have not been brought up to any trade, yet I hope I can contrive to
support myself somehow."
When Fortunatus had done his dinner, he took his hat and walked to the
sea-side, thinking of what he could do, so as to be no longer a burden
to his parents. Just as he reached the sea-shore, the Earl of
Flanders, who had been to Jerusalem, was embarking on board his ship
with all his servants, to set sail for Flanders. Fortunatus now
thought he would offer himself to be the Earl's page. When the Earl
saw that he was a smart-looking lad, and heard the quick replies which
he made to his questions, he took him into his service; so at once
they all went on board. On their way the ship stopped a short time at
the port of Venice, where Fortunatus saw many strange things, which
made him wish still more to travel, and taught him much that he did
not know before.
Soon after this they came to Flanders; and they had not been long on
shore, before the Earl, his master, was married to the daughter of the
Duke of Cleves. The wedding was kept with all sorts of public
feasting, and games on horseback, called tilts, which lasted many
days; and, among the rest, the Earl's lady gave two jewels as prizes
to be played for, each of them the value of a hundred crowns. One of
them was won by Fortunatus, and the other by Timothy, a servant of the
Duke of Burgundy; who afterwards ran another tilt with Fortunatus, so
that the winner was to have both the jewels. So they tilted, and, at
the fourth course, Fortunatus hoisted Timothy a full spear's length
from his horse, and thus won both the jewels, which pleased the Earl
and Countess so much that they praised Fortunatus, and thought better
of him than ever. At this time, also, Fortunatus had many rich
presents given him by the lords and ladies of the court. But the high
favour shown him made his fellow-servants jealous, and one, named
Robert, who had always pretended a great friendship for Fortunatus,
made him believe that for all his seeming kindness, the Earl, in
secret, envied him his great skill in tilting. Robert said, too, that
he had heard the Earl give private orders to one of his servants to
find some way of killing him next day, while they should all be out
hunting.
Fortunatus thanked the wicked Robert for what he thought a great
kindness; and the next day, at daybreak, he took the swiftest horse in
the Earl's stables, and left the country. When the Earl heard that
Fortunatus had gone away in a hurry, he was much surprised, and asked
all his servants what they knew about the matter, but they all denied
knowing anything of it, or why he had left them. The Earl then said,
"Fortunatus was a lad for whom I had a great esteem; I am sure some of
you must have given him an affront; if I discover it, I shall not fail
to punish the guilty person." In the meantime, Fortunatus, when he
found himself out of the Earl's country, stopped at an inn to refresh
himself, and began to reckon how much he had about him. He took out
all his fine clothes and jewels, and could not help putting them on.
He then looked at himself in the glass, and thought that, to be sure,
he was quite a fine smart fellow. Next he took out his purse, and
counted the money that had been given him by the lords and ladies of
the Earl's court. He found that in all he had five hundred crowns; so
he bought a horse, and took care to send back the one that he had
taken from the Earl's stable.
He then set off for Calais, crossed the Channel, landed safely at
Dover, and went on to London, where he soon made his way into genteel
company, and had once the honour to dance with the daughter of a Duke
at the Lord Mayor's ball. This sort of life, as anybody may well
think, soon made away with his little stock of money. When Fortunatus
found that he had not a penny left, he began to think of going back
again to France, and soon after went on board a ship bound to Picardy.
He landed in that country, but finding no employment he set off for
Brittany, when he lost his way in crossing a wood, and was forced to
stay in it all night. The next morning he was little better off, for
he could find no path. So he walked about from one part of the wood to
another, till at last, on the evening of the second day, he saw a
spring, at which he drank very heartily; but still he had nothing to
eat, and was ready to die with hunger. When night came on, he heard
the growling of wild beasts, so he climbed up a high tree for safety,
and he had hardly seated himself in it, before a lion walked fiercely
up to the spring to drink. This made him very much afraid. When the
lion had gone away, a bear came to drink also; and, as the moon shone
very bright, the beast looked up, and saw Fortunatus, and straightway
began to climb up the tree to get at him.
Fortunatus drew his sword, and sat quiet till the bear was come within
arm's length; and then he ran him through the body. This drove the
bear so very savage, that he made a great spring to get at him; but
the bough broke, and down he fell, and lay sprawling and howling on
the ground. Fortunatus now looked around on all sides; and as he saw
no more wild beasts near, he thought this would be a good time to get
rid of the bear at once; so down he came, and killed him at a single
blow. Being almost starved for want of food, the poor youth stooped
down, and was going to suck the blood of the bear; but looking round
once more, to see if any wild beasts were coming, he on a sudden
beheld a beautiful lady standing by his side, with a bandage over her
eyes, leaning upon a wheel, and looking as if she were going to speak,
which she soon did, in these words: "Know, young man, that my name is
Fortune; I have the power to bestow wisdom, strength, riches, health,
beauty, and long life; one of these I am willing to grant you--choose
for yourself which it shall be."
Fortunatus was not a moment before he answered: "Good lady, I wish to
have riches in such plenty that I may never again know what it is to
be so hungry as I now find myself." The lady then gave him a purse,
and told him that in all the countries where he might happen to be, he
need only put his hand into the purse as often as he pleased, and he
would be sure to find in it ten pieces of gold; that the purse should
never fail of yielding the same sum as long as it was kept by him and
his children; but that when he and his children should be dead, then
the purse would lose its power.
Fortunatus now did not know what to do with himself for joy, and began
to thank the lady very much; but she told him that he had better think
of making his way out of the wood. She then directed him which path to
take, and bade him farewell. He walked by the light of the moon, as
fast as his weakness and fatigue would let him, till he came near an
inn. But before he went into it, he thought it would be best to see
whether the Lady Fortune had been as good as her word; so he put his
hand into his purse, and to his great joy he counted ten pieces of
gold. Having nothing to fear, Fortunatus walked boldly up to the inn,
and called for the best supper they could get ready in a minute;
"For," said he, "I must wait till to-morrow before I am very nice. I
am so hungry now, that almost anything will do." Fortunatus very soon
ate quite enough, and then called for every sort of wine in the house,
and drank his fill. After supper, he began to think what sort of life
he should lead; "For," said he to himself, "I shall now have money
enough for everything I can desire." He slept that night in the very
best bed in the house, and the next day he ordered the finest victuals
of all kinds. When he rang his bell, all the waiters tried who should
run the fastest, to ask him what he pleased to want; and the landlord
himself, hearing what a noble guest was come to his house, took care
to be standing at the door to bow to him when he should be passing
Fortunatus asked the landlord whether any fine horses could be got
near at hand; also, if he knew of some smart-looking, clever
men-servants who wanted places. By chance the landlord was able to
provide him with both. As he had now got everything he wanted, he set
out on the finest horse that was ever seen, with two servants, for the
nearest town. There he bought some grand suits of clothes, put his two
servants into liveries laced with gold, and they went on to Paris.
Here he took the best house that was to be had, and lived in great
pomp. He invited the nobility, and gave grand balls to all the most
beautiful ladies of the court. He went to all public places of
amusement, and the first lords in the country invited him to their
houses. He had lived in this manner for about a year, when he began to
think of going to Famagosta to visit his parents, whom he had left
very poor. "But," thought Fortunatus, "as I am young and have not seen
much of the world, I should like to meet with some person of more
knowledge than I have, who would make my journey both useful and
pleasing to me." Soon after this he met with an old gentleman, called
Loch-Fitty, who was a native of Scotland, and had left a wife and ten
children a great many years ago, in hopes to better his fortune; but
now, owing to many accidents, was poorer than ever, and had not money
enough to take him back to his family.
When Loch-Fitty found how much Fortunatus wished to obtain knowledge,
he told him many of the strange adventures he had met with, and gave
him an account of all the countries he had been in, as well as of the
customs, dress, and manners of the people. Fortunatus thought to
himself, "This is the very man I stand in need of;" so at once he made
him a good offer, which the old gentleman agreed to, but made the
bargain that he might first go and visit his family. Fortunatus told
him that he should. "And," said he, "as I am a little tired of being
always in the midst of such noisy pleasures as we find at Paris, I
will, with your leave, go with you to Scotland, and see your wife and
children." They get out the very next day, and came safe to the house
of Loch-Fitty; and in all the journey, Fortunatus did not once wish to
change his kind companion for all the pleasures and grandeur he had
left behind. Loch-Fitty kissed his wife and children, five of whom
were daughters, and the most beautiful creatures that were ever
beheld. When they were seated, his wife said to him, "Ah! dear Lord
Loch-Fitty, how happy I am to see you once again! Now, I hope we shall
enjoy each other's company for the rest of our lives. What though we
are poor! We will be content if you will but promise not to think of
leaving us again to get riches, only because we have a noble title."
Fortunatus heard this with great surprise. "What!" said he, "are you a
lord? Then you shall be a rich lord too. And that you may not think I
lay you under any burden in the fortune I shall give you, I will put
it in your power to make me your debtor instead. Give me your youngest
daughter, Cassandra, for a wife, and accompany us as far as Famagosta,
and take all your family with you, that you may have pleasant company
on your way back, when you have rested in that place from your
fatigue."
Lord Loch-Fitty shed some tears of joy to think he should at last see
his family again raised to all the honours which it had once enjoyed.
He gladly agreed to the marriage of Fortunatus with his daughter
Cassandra, and then told him the reasons that had forced him to drop
his title and live poor at Paris. When Lord Loch-Fitty had ended his
story, they agreed that the very next morning the Lady Cassandra
should be asked to accept the hand of Fortunatus; and that, if she
should consent, they would set sail in a few days for Famagosta. The
next morning the offer was made to her, as had been agreed on, and
Fortunatus had the pleasure of hearing from the lips of the beautiful
Cassandra, that the very first time she cast her eyes on him she
thought him the most handsome gentleman in the world.
Everything was soon ready for them to set out on the journey.
Fortunatus, Lord Loch-Fitty, his lady, and their ten children, then
set sail in a large ship: they had a good voyage, and landed safe at
the port of Famagosta. There, however, Fortunatus found, with great
grief and self-reproach, that his father and mother were both dead.
However, as he was an easy-tempered gentleman, and had his betrothed
Cassandra and her whole family to reconcile him to his grief, it did
not last very long; the wedding took place almost immediately; so they
lived all together in Famagosta, and in very great style. By the end
of the first year, the Lady Cassandra had a little son, who was
christened Ampedo; and the next year another, who was christened
Andolucia. For twelve years Fortunatus lived a very happy life with
his wife and children, and his wife's kindred; and as each of her
sisters had a fortune given her from the purse of Fortunatus, they
soon married very well. But by this time he began to long to travel
again; and he thought, as he was now so much older and wiser than when
he was at Paris, he might go by himself, for Lord Loch-Fitty was at
this time too old to bear fatigue. After he had, with great trouble,
got the consent of the Lady Cassandra, and made her a promise to stay
away only two years, he made all things ready for his journey; and
taking his lady into one of his private rooms, he showed her three
chests of gold. He told her to keep one of these for herself, and take
charge of the other two for their sons, in case any evil should happen
to him. He then led her back to the room where the whole family were
sitting, embraced them all tenderly one by one, and set sail with a
fair wind for Alexandria.
When Fortunatus came to this place, he was told it was the custom to
make a handsome present to the sultan; so he sent him a piece of plate
that cost five thousand pounds. The sultan was so much pleased with
this, that he ordered a hundred casks of spices to be given to
Fortunatus in return. Fortunatus sent these straight to the Lady
Cassandra, with the most tender letters, by the same ship that brought
him, which was then going back to Famagosta. Having stated that he
wished to travel through his country by land, he obtained from the
sultan such passports and letters as he might stand in need of, to the
other princes in those parts. He then bought a camel, hired proper
servants, and set off on his travels. He went through Turkey, Persia,
and from thence to Carthage; he next went into the country of Prester
John, who rides upon a white elephant, and has kings to wait on him.
Fortunatus made him some rich presents, and went on to Calcutta; and,
in coming back, he took Jerusalem in the way, and so came again to
Alexandria, where he had the good fortune to find the same ship that
had brought him, and to learn from the captain that his wife and
family were all in perfect health. The first thing he did was to pay a
visit to his old friend the sultan, to whom he again made a handsome
present, and was invited to dine at his palace. After dinner, the
sultan said: "It must be vastly amusing, Fortunatus, to hear an
account of all the places you have seen; pray favour me with a history
of your travels." Fortunatus did as he was desired, and pleased the
sultan very much by telling him the many odd adventures he had met
with; and, above all, the manner of his first becoming known to the
Lord Loch-Fitty, and the desire of that lord to maintain the honours
of his family. When he had ended, the sultan said he was greatly
pleased with what he had heard, but that he possessed a more curious
thing than any Fortunatus had told him of. He then led him into a room
almost filled with jewels, opened a large closet, and took out a cap,
which he said was of greater value than all the rest. Fortunatus
thought the sultan was joking, and told him he had seen many a better
cap than that. "Ah!" said the sultan, "that is because you do not know
its value. Whoever puts this cap on his head, and wishes to be in any
part of the world, will find himself there in a moment."
"Indeed!" said Fortunatus; "and pray, is the man living who made it?"
"I know nothing about that," said the sultan.
"One would hardly believe it," said Fortunatus. "Pray, sir, is it very
heavy?"
"Not at all," replied the sultan; "you may feel it."
Fortunatus took up the cap, put it on his head, and could not help
wishing himself on board the ship that was going back to Famagosta. In
less than a moment he was carried on board of her, just as she was
ready to sail; and there being a brisk gale, they were out of sight in
half an hour, before the sultan had even time to repent of his folly
for letting Fortunatus try the cap on his head. The ship came safe to
Famagosta, after a happy passage, and Fortunatus found his wife and
children well; but Lord Loch-Fitty and his lady had died of old age,
and were buried in the same grave.
Fortunatus now began to take great pleasure in teaching his two boys
all sorts of useful learning, and also such manly sports as wrestling
and tilting. Now and then he thought about the curious cap which had
brought him home, and then would wish he could just take a peep at
what was passing in other countries; which wish was always fulfilled:
but he never stayed there more than an hour or two, so that the Lady
Cassandra did not miss him, and was no longer made uneasy by his love
of travelling.
At last, Fortunatus began to grow old, and the Lady Cassandra fell
sick and died. The loss of her caused him so much grief, that soon
after he fell sick too. As he thought he had not long to live, he
called his two sons to his bedside, and told them the secrets of the
purse and the cap, which he begged they would not, on any account,
make known to others. "Follow my example," said he: "I have had the
purse these forty years, and no living person knew from what source I
obtained my riches." He then told them to make use of the purse
between them, and to live together in friendship; and embracing them,
died soon after. Fortunatus was buried with great pomp by the side of
Lady Cassandra, in his own chapel, and was for a long time mourned by
the people of Famagosta.
THE BREMEN TOWN MUSICIANS.
There was a man who owned a donkey, which had carried his sacks to the
mill industriously for many years, but whose strength had come to an
end, so that the poor beast grew more and more unfit for work. The
master determined to stop his food, but the donkey, discovering that
there was no good intended to him, ran away and took the road to
Bremen: "There," thought he, "I can turn Town Musician."
When he had gone a little way, he found a hound lying on the road and
panting, like one who was tired with running. "Hollo! what are you
panting so for, worthy Seize 'em?" asked the donkey.
"Oh!" said the dog, "just because I am old, and get weaker every day,
and cannot go out hunting, my master wanted to kill me, so I have
taken leave of him; but how shall I gain my living now?"
"I'll tell you what," said the donkey, "I am going to Bremen to be
Town Musician; come with me and take to music too. I will play the
lute, and you shall beat the drum."
The dog liked the idea, and they travelled on. It was not long before
they saw a cat sitting by the road, making a face like three rainy
"Now then, what has gone wrong with you old Whiskers?" said the
donkey.
"Who can be merry when his neck is in danger?" answered the cat.
"Because I am advanced in years, and my teeth are blunt, and I like
sitting before the fire and purring better than chasing the mice
about, my mistress wanted to drown me. I have managed to escape, but
good advice is scarce; tell me where I shall go to?"
"Come with us two to Bremen; you understand serenading; you also can
become a Town Musician."
The cat thought it a capital idea, and went with them. Soon after the
three runaways came to a farmyard, and there sat a cock on the gate,
crowing with might and main.
"You crow loud enough to deafen one," said the donkey; "what is the
matter with you?"
"I prophesied fair weather," said the cock, "because it is our good
mistress's washing-day, and she wants to dry the clothes; but because
to-morrow is Sunday, and company is coming, the mistress has no pity
on me, and has told the cook to put me into the soup to-morrow, and I
must have my head cut off to-night: so now I am crowing with all my
might as long as I can."
"O you old Redhead," said the donkey, "you had better come with us; we
are going to Bremen, where you will certainly find something better
than having your head cut off; you have a good voice, and if we all
make music together, it will be something striking."
The cock liked the proposal, and they went on, all four together.
But they could not reach the city of Bremen in one day, and they came
in the evening to a wood, where they agreed to spend the night. The
donkey and the dog laid themselves down under a great tree, but the
cat and the cock went higher--the cock flying up to the topmost
branch, where he was safest. Before he went to sleep he looked round
towards all the four points of the compass, and he thought he saw a
spark shining in the distance. He called to his companions that there
must be a house not far off; for he could see a light. The donkey
said: "Then we must rise and go to it, for the lodgings here are very
bad;" and the dog said, "Yes; a few bones with a little flesh on them
would do me good." So they took the road in the direction where the
light was, and soon saw it shine brighter; and it got larger and
larger till they came to a brilliantly-illumined robber's house. The
donkey, being the biggest, got up at the window and looked in.
"What do you see, Greybeard?" said the cock.
"What do I see?" answered the donkey: "a table covered with beautiful
food and drink, and robbers are sitting round it and enjoying
themselves."
"That would do nicely for us," said the cock.
"Yes, indeed, if we were only there," replied the donkey.
The animals then consulted together how they should manage to drive
out the robbers, till at last they settled on a plan. Tie donkey was
to place himself with his forefeet on the window-sill, the dog to
climb on the donkey's back, and the cat on the dog's, and, at last,
the cock was to fly up and perch himself on the cat's head. When that
was done, at a signal they began their music all together: the donkey
brayed, the dog barked, the cat mewed, and the cock crowed; then, with
one great smash, they dashed through the window into the room, so that
the glass clattered down. The robbers jumped up at this dreadful
noise, thinking that nothing less than a ghost was coming in, and ran
away into the wood in a great fright. The four companions then sat
down at the table, quite content with what was left there, and ate as
if they were expecting to fast for a month to come.
When the four musicians had finished, they put out the light, and each
one looked out for a suitable and comfortable sleeping-place. The
donkey lay down on the dunghill, the dog behind the door, the cat on
the hearth near the warm ashes, and the cock set himself on the
hen-roost; and, as they were all tired with their long journey, they
soon went to sleep. Soon after midnight, as the robbers in the
distance could see that no more lights were burning in the house, and
as all seemed quiet, the captain said, "We ought not to have let
ourselves be scared so easily," and sent one of them to examine the
house. The messenger found everything quiet, went into the kitchen to
light a candle, and, thinking the cat's shining fiery eyes were live
coals, he held a match to them to light it. But the cat did not
understand the joke, flew in his face, spat at him, and scratched. He
was dreadfully frightened, ran away, and was going out of the back
door; when the dog, who was lying there, jumped up and bit him in the
leg. As he ran through the yard, past the dunghill, the donkey gave
him a good kick with his hind-foot; and the cock being awakened, and
made quite lively by the noise, called out from the hen-roost
"Cock-a-doodle-doo!"
The robber ran as hard as he could, back to the captain, and said:
"Oh, dear! in the house sits a horrid old witch, who blew at me, and
scratched my face with her long fingers; and by the door stands a man
with a knife, who stabbed me in the leg; and in the yard lies a black
monster, who hit me with a club; and up on the roof there sits the
judge, who called out, 'Bring the rascal up here'--so I made the best
of my way off."
From that time the robbers never trusted themselves again in the
house; but the four musicians liked it so well that they could not
make up their minds to leave it, and spent there the remainder of
their days, as the last person who told the story is ready to avouch
for a fact.
RIQUET WITH THE TUFT
Once upon a time a queen had a little son, who was so ugly and
ill-made, that for a long time the poor little baby was thought hardly
human. However, a good fairy, who presided at his birth, assured his
mother that, though ugly, he would have so much sense and wit that he
would never be disagreeable; moreover, she bestowed on him the power
of communicating these gifts to the person he should love best in the
world. At this the queen was a little comforted, and became still more
so, when, as soon as he could speak, the infant began to say such
pretty and clever things that everybody was charmed with him. (I
forgot to mention that his name was Riquet with the Tuft, because he
was born with a curious tuft of hair on the top of his head.)
Seven or eight years after this, the queen of a neighbouring country
had two little daughters, twins, at whose birth the same fairy
presided. The elder twin was more beautiful than the day--the younger
so extremely ugly that the mother's extravagant joy in the first was
all turned to grief about the second. So, in order to calm her
feelings, the fairy told her that the one daughter should be as stupid
as she was pretty, while the other would grow up so clever and
charming that nobody would miss her want of beauty.
"Heaven grant it!" sighed the queen; "but are there no means of giving
a little sense to the one who is so beautiful?"
"I can do nothing for her, madam," returned the fairy--"nothing as
regards her own fortunes; but I grant her the power of making the
person who best pleases her as handsome as herself."
Accordingly, as the young princesses grew up, their perfections grew
with them; and nothing was spoken of but the beauty of the elder and
the wit of the younger. True, their faults increased equally: the one
became uglier, and the other more stupid, day by day. Unlucky fair
one! she never had a word to say for herself, or else it was the
silliest word imaginable, and she was so awkward that she could not
place four teacups in a row without breaking at least one of them, nor
drink a glass of water without spilling half of it over her clothes.
Beauty is a great charm; yet, whenever the sisters went out together,
those who were attracted by the elder's lovely face, in less than half
an hour were sure to be seen at the side of the younger, laughing at
her witty and pleasant sayings, and altogether deserting the poor
beauty, who had just sense enough to find it out, and to feel that she
would have given all her good looks for one half of her sister's
talents.
One day, when she had hid herself in a wood, and was crying over her
hard fate, she saw coming towards her a little man, very ugly, but
magnificently dressed. Who should this be but Prince Riquet with the
Tuft? He had seen her portrait, had fallen desperately in love with
her, and secretly quitted his father's kingdom that he might have the
pleasure of meeting her. Delighted to find her alone, he came forward
with all the respect and politeness imaginable. But he could not help
noticing how very melancholy she was, and that all the elegant
compliments he made her did not seem to affect her in the least.
"I cannot comprehend, madam," said he, "how so charming and lovely a
lady can be so very sad. Never did I see anyone who could at all
compare with you."
"That's all you know," said the princess, and stopped.
"Beauty," continued the prince, sighing, "is so great an advantage
that, if one possessed it, one would never trouble oneself about
anything else.
"I wish I were as ugly as you and had some sense, rather than be as
handsome as I am, and such a fool."
"Madam," said Riquet politely, though her speech was not exactly
civil, "nothing shows intellect so much as the modesty of believing
one does not possess it."
"I don't know that; but I know I am a great fool, and it vexes me so,
that I wish I was dead," cried the princess bitterly.
"If that is all, madam, I can easily put an end to your grief, for I
have the power of making the person I love best as clever as I
please. I will do it, provided you consent to marry me."
The princess stood dumb with astonishment. She--to marry that little
frightful creature--scarcely a man at all!
"I see," said Riquet, "that my proposal offends and grieves you. Well,
I will give you a year to consider it."
Now the young lady was so stupid that she thought a year's end was a
long way off--so long that it seemed as if it might not come at all,
or something might happen between whiles. And she had such a longing
to be clever and admired that she thought at all risks she would
accept the chance of becoming so. Accordingly, she promised Riquet to
marry him that day twelvemonth.
No sooner had she said it than she felt herself quite another being.
She found she could at once say anything she chose, and say it in the
most graceful and brilliant way. She began a lively conversation with
Prince Riquet, and chattered so fast and so wittily, that he began to
be afraid he had given her so much cleverness as to leave himself
none.
When she returned to the palace, all the court were astonished at the
change. She, who had annoyed everybody by the impertinent, tasteless,
or downright foolish things she uttered, now charmed everybody by her
wit, her pleasantness, and her exceeding good sense. The king himself
began to come to her apartment, and ask her advice in state affairs.
Her mother, and indeed the whole kingdom, were delighted; the only
person to be pitied was the poor younger sister, of whom nobody now
took the least notice.
Meantime, princes came in throngs to ask in marriage this wonderful
princess, who was as clever as she was beautiful; but she found none
to suit her, probably because the more sense a lady has, the more
difficult she is to please. As for her promise to Riquet with the
Tuft, being given in the days when she was so dull and stupid, it now
never once came into her head; until one day, being quite perplexed by
her numerous suitors, she went to take a solitary walk and think the
matter over, when by chance she came into the same wood where she had
met the prince. There, all of a sudden, she thought she heard a queer
running about and chattering underground. "Fetch me that spit," cried
one; "Put some more wood on that fire," said another; and by and by
the earth opened, showing a great kitchen filled with cooks, cooking a
splendid banquet. They were all working merrily at their several
duties, and singing together in the most lively chorus.
"What is all this about?" asked the amazed princess.
"If you please, madam," replied the head-cook, politely, "we are
cooking the wedding-dinner of Prince Riquet with the Tuft, who is to
be married to-morrow."
"To-morrow!" cried the princess, all at once recollecting her promise;
at which she was so frightened that she thought she should have
fallen to the earth. Greater still was her alarm when, at only a few
steps' distance, she beheld Riquet, dressed splendidly like a prince
and a bridegroom.
"You see me, princess, exact to my word; and I doubt not you are the
same, come to make me the happiest of mankind."
"Prince," said the lady, frankly, "I must confess that such was not my
intention, and I fear I shall never be able to do as you desire."
"You surprise me, madam."
"I can well believe it; and if I had to do with a brute, instead of a
gentleman of sense and feeling, I should be very uneasy," returned
she; "but since I speak with the cleverest man in the world, I am sure
he will hear reason, and will not bind me, now a sensible woman, to a
promise I made when I was only a fool."
"If I were a fool myself, madam, I might well complain of your broken
promise; and being, as you say, a man of sense, should I not complain
of what takes away all the happiness of my life? Tell me candidly, is
there anything in me, except my ugliness, which displeases you? Do you
object to my birth, my temper, my manners?"
"No, truly," replied the princess; "I like everything in you,
except"--and she hesitated courteously--"except your appearance."
"Then, madam, I need not lose my happiness; for if I have the gift of
making clever whosoever I love best, you also are able to make the
person you prefer as handsome as ever you please. Could you love me
enough to do that?"
"I think I could," said the princess, and her heart being greatly
softened towards him, she wished that he might become the handsomest
prince in all the world. No sooner had she done so than Riquet with
the Tuft appeared in her eyes the most elegant young man she had ever
seen.
Ill-natured people have said that this was no fairy-gift, but that
love created the change. They declare that the princess, when she
thought over her lover's perseverance, patience, good-humour, and
discretion, and counted his numerous fine qualities of mind and
disposition, saw no longer the deformity of his body or the plainness
of his features; that his hump was merely an exaggerated stoop, and
his awkward movements became only an interesting eccentricity. Nay,
even his eyes, which squinted terribly, seemed always looking on all
sides for her, in token of his violent love, and his great red nose
gave him an air very martial and heroic.
However this may be, it is certain that the princess married him; that
either she retained her good sense, or he never felt the want of it;
and he never again became ugly--or, at least, not in his wife's eyes;
so they both lived very happy until they died.
HOUSE ISLAND.
There lived in Norway, not far from the city of Drontheim, a rich and
prosperous gentleman. He had an only daughter, called Aslog, the fame
of whose beauty spread far and wide. The greatest men of the country
sought her, but all were alike unsuccessful in their suit. Her father,
who thought his daughter delayed her choice only that she might choose
the better, forbore to interfere, and exulted in her prudence. But
when, at length, the richest and noblest had tried their fortune with
as little success as the rest, he grew angry, called his daughter, and
said to her:--
"Hitherto I have left you to your free choice, but since I see that
you reject all without any distinction, and the very best of your
suitors seem not good enough for you, I will keep measures no longer
with you. What! shall my family become extinct, and my inheritance
pass away into the hands of strangers? I will break your stubborn
spirit. I give you now till the festival of the great Winter-night; by
that time you must make your decision, or prepare to accept the
husband whom I myself shall select."
Now Aslog secretly loved a youth named Orm, handsome, noble and brave.
She loved him with her whole soul, and would sooner die than bestow
her hand on another. But Orm was poor, and poverty compelled him to
keep his love as secret as her own.
When Aslog saw the darkness of her father's countenance, and heard his
angry words, she turned pale as death, for she knew his temper, and
doubted not but that he would put his threats into execution. Without
uttering a word in reply, she retired to her chamber, and pondered
vainly how to escape the storm that hung over her. The great festival
approached nearer and nearer, and her anguish increased every day.
At last the lovers resolved on flight. Orm knew a secure place, where
they could hide until they found an opportunity of quitting the
country. So at night, when all were asleep, he led the trembling Aslog
over the snow and ice-fields away to the mountains. The moon and the
stars lighted them on their way. They had under their arms a few
articles of dress and some skins of animals, which were all they could
carry. They ascended the mountains the whole night long, till they
reached a lonely spot inclosed with lofty rocks. Here Orm conducted
the weary Aslog into a cave, the low and narrow entrance to which was
hardly perceptible, but it soon enlarged to a great hall, reaching
deep into the mountain. He kindled a fire, and they now, reposing on
their skins, sat in the deepest solitude far away from all the world.
Orm was the first who had discovered this cave, which is shown to this
very day. But as no one then knew anything of it, they were safe from
the pursuit of Aslog's father. They passed the whole winter in this
retirement, contented and even happy; for they knew they were married,
and belonged to one another, and no cruel father could separate them
more. Orm used to go a-hunting, and Aslog stayed at home in the cave,
minded the fire, and prepared the necessary food. Frequently did she
mount the points of the rocks, but her eyes, did they wander ever so
far, saw only glittering snow-fields.
The spring now came on--the woods were green--the meadows put on their
various colors, people began to wander out for summer pleasuring, and
Aslog could but rarely and with circumspection venture to leave the
cave. One evening Orm came in with the intelligence that he had
recognised her father's servants in the distance, and that he could
hardly have been unobserved by them. "They will surround this place,"
continued he, "and never rest till they have found us; we must quit
our retreat, then, without a moment's delay."
They accordingly descended on the other side of the mountain, and
reached the strand, where they fortunately found a boat. Orm pushed
off, and the boat drove into the open sea. They had escaped their
pursuers, but they were now exposed to dangers of another kind:
whither should they turn? They could not venture to land, for Aslog's
father was lord of the whole coast, and they would infallibly fall
into his hands. Nothing then remained for them but to commit their
bark to the wind and waves. They were driven along the entire night.
At break of day the coast had disappeared, and they saw nothing but
the sky, the sea, and the waves. They had not brought one morsel of
food with them, and thirst and hunger began now to torment them. Three
days did they toss about in this state of misery, and Aslog, faint and
exhausted, saw nothing but certain death before her.
At length, on the evening of the third day, they discovered an island
of tolerable magnitude, and surrounded by a number of smaller ones.
Orm immediately steered for it, but, just as he came near it, there
suddenly rose a violent wind, and the sea rolled every moment higher
and higher. He turned about with a view of approaching it on another
side, but with no better success; his vessel, as often as it neared
the island, was driven back as if by an invisible power. "God help
us!" he cried, and crossed himself, and looked on poor Aslog, who
seemed to be dying of weakness before his eyes. But scarcely had the
exclamation passed his lips when the storm ceased, the waves subsided,
and the vessel came to the shore without encountering any hindrance.
Orm jumped out on the beach; some mussels that he found on the strand
strengthened and revived the exhausted Aslog, so that she was soon
able to leave the boat.
The island was overgrown with low dwarf shrubs, and seemed to be
uninhabited; but when they had reached the middle of it, they
discovered a house, which appeared to be half under the surface of
the earth. In the hope of meeting with human help, the wanderers
approached it. They listened, but the most perfect silence reigned
there. Orm at length opened the door, and they both walked in: but
what was their surprise, to find everything regulated and arranged as
if for inhabitants, yet not a single living creature visible. The fire
was burning on the hearth, in the middle of the room, and a kettle
with fish hung on it, apparently only waiting for some one to take it
up and eat it. The beds were made, and ready to receive their wearied
tenants. Orm and Aslog stood for some time dubious, and looked on with
a certain degree of awe, but at last, overcome by hunger, they took up
the food and ate. When they had satisfied their appetites, and still
discovered no human being, they gave way to weariness, and laid
themselves in the beds, which looked so peaceful and inviting to their
wearied limbs.
They had expected to be awakened in the night by the owners of the
house on their return home, but their expectation was not fulfilled;
they slept undisturbed till the morning sun shone in upon them. No one
appeared on any of the following days, and it seemed as if some
invisible power had made ready the house for their reception. They
spent the whole summer in perfect happiness: they were, to be sure,
solitary, yet they did not miss mankind. The wild birds' eggs, and the
fish they caught, yielded them provisions in abundance.
When autumn came, Aslog brought forth a son. In the midst of their
joy at this, they were surprised by a wonderful apparition. The door
opened on a sudden, and an old woman stepped in. She wore a handsome
blue dress; there was something proud, but at the same time something
strange, in her appearance.
"Do not be afraid," said she, "at my unexpected appearance. I am the
owner of this house, and I thank you for the clean and neat state in
which you have kept it, and for the good order in which I find
everything with you. I would willingly have come sooner, but I had no
power to do so till this little heathen (pointing to the new-born
babe) was come to the light. Now I have free access. Only fetch no
priest from the mainland to christen it, or I must depart again. If
you will in this matter comply with my wishes, you may not only
continue to live here, but all the good that ever you can wish for I
will do you. Whatever you take in hand shall prosper; good luck shall
follow you wherever you go. But break this condition, and depend upon
it that misfortune after misfortune will come on you, and even on this
child will I avenge myself. If you want anything, or are in danger,
you have only to pronounce my name three times, and I will appear and
lend you assistance. I am of the race of the old giants, and my name
is Guru. But beware of uttering in my presence the name of Him whom no
giant may hear of, and never venture to make the sign of the cross, or
to cut it on beam or board in the house. You may dwell in this house
the whole year long, only be so good as to give it up to me on Yule
evening, when the sun is at the lowest, as then we celebrate our great
festival, and then only are we permitted to be merry. At least, if you
should not be willing to go out of the house, keep yourselves up in
the loft as quiet as possible the whole day long, and as you value
your lives do not look down into the room below until midnight is
past. After that you may take possession of everything again."
When the old woman had thus spoken she vanished, and Aslog and Orm
lived without any disturbance, contented and happy. Orm never made a
cast of his net without getting a plentiful draught; he never shot an
arrow from his bow that it was not sure to hit; in short, whatever
they took in hand, were it ever so trifling, evidently prospered.
When Christmas came, they cleaned up the house in the best manner, set
everything in order, kindled a fire on the hearth, and as the twilight
approached they went up to the loft, where they remained quite still
and quiet. At length it grew dark; they thought they heard a sound of
whizzing and snorting in the air, such as the swans used to make in
the winter time. There was a hole in the roof over the fireplace,
which might be opened and shut either to let in the light from above,
or to afford a free passage for the smoke. Orm lifted up the lid,
which was covered with a skin, and put out his head. But what a
wonderful sight then presented itself to his eyes! The little islands
around were all lit up with countless blue lights, which moved about
without ceasing, jumped up and down, then skipped to the shore,
assembled together, and came nearer and nearer to the large island
where Orm and Aslog lived. At last they reached it, and arranged
themselves in a circle around a large stone not far from the shore,
and which Orm well knew. But what was his surprise when he saw that
the stone had now completely assumed the form of a man, though a
monstrous and gigantic one! He could clearly perceive that the little
blue lights were borne by Dwarfs whose pale clay-coloured faces, with
their huge noses and red eyes, disfigured too by birds' bills and
owls' eyes, were supported by misshapen bodies, and they tottered and
wabbled about here and there, so that they seemed to be at the same
time merry and in pain. Suddenly, the circle opened; the little ones
retired on each side, and Guru--who was the woman Guru, whom Orm
recognised immediately, though she had risen in stature and size so as
to be almost as gigantic as the stone man--advanced towards it. She
threw both her arms round the image, which immediately seemed to
receive life and motion. Then the Dwarfs, with wonderful capers and
grimaces, began a song, or, to speak more properly, a howl, with which
the whole island resounded and almost trembled at the noise. Orm,
quite terrified, drew in his head, and he and Aslog remained in the
dark, so still that they hardly ventured to draw their breath.
The procession moved on towards the house, as might be clearly
perceived by the nearer approach of the shouting and crying. They were
now all come in, light and active; the Dwarfs were heard jumping about
on the benches, and heavy and loud sounded at intervals the steps of
the giants. Orm and his wife listened to the clattering of the plates,
and the shouts of joy with which they celebrated their banquet. When
it was over and midnight drew near, they began to dance to that
ravishing fairy-tune, which some have heard in the rocky glens, and
learned by listening to the underground musicians. As soon as Aslog
caught the sound of this air, she felt an irresistible longing to see
the dance. Nor was Orm able to keep her back. "Let me look," said she,
"or my heart will burst." She took her child and placed herself at the
extreme end of the loft, whence, without being observed, she could see
all that passed. Long did she gaze, without taking off her eyes for an
instant, on the dance--on the bold and wonderful springs of the little
creatures, who seemed to float in the air, and not so much as to touch
the ground, while the ravishing melody of the Elves filled her whole
soul. The child, meanwhile, which lay in her arms grew sleepy and drew
its breath heavily, and, without ever thinking on the promise she had
given the old woman, she made, as is usual, the sign of the cross over
the mouth of the child, and said, "Christ bless you, my babe!"
The instant she had spoken the word there was raised a horrible,
piercing cry. The Dwarfs tumbled head over heels out at the door with
terrible crushing and crowding, their lights went out, and in a few
minutes the whole house was clear of them and left desolate. Orm and
Aslog, frightened to death, hid themselves in the most retired nook
they could find. They did not venture to stir till daybreak, and not
till the sun shone through the hole in the roof down on the fireplace
did they feel courage enough to descend from the loft.
The table remained still covered as the underground people had left
it; all their vessels, which were of silver, and manufactured in the
most beautiful manner, lay upon it. In the middle of the room, there
stood upon the ground a huge copper kettle half full of sweet mead,
and by the side of it a drinking-horn of pure gold. In the corner
rested, against the wall, a stringed instrument, not unlike a
dulcimer, which, as people believe, the Giantesses used to play on.
They gazed on what was before them, full of admiration, but without
venturing to lay their hands on anything; how great and fearful was
their amazement, when, on turning about, they saw sitting at the table
an immense figure, which Orm instantly recognised as the Giant whom
Guru had animated by her embrace. He was now a cold and hard stone.
While they were standing gazing on it, Guru herself entered the room
in her giant form. She wept so bitterly, that her tears trickled down
on the ground. It was long ere her sobbing permitted her to utter a
single word; at last she spoke:--
"Great affliction have you brought on me, and henceforth I must weep
while I live; yet as I know that you have not done this with evil
intentions, I forgive you, though it were a trifle for me to crush the
whole house like an egg-shell over your heads."
"What have we done?" cried Orm and Aslog, penetrated with the deepest
sorrow.
"Alas!" answered she, "my husband, whom I love more than myself, there
he sits, petrified for ever; never again will he open his eyes! Three
hundred years lived I with my father on the island of Kunnan, happy in
the innocence of youth, as the fairest among the Giant-maidens. Mighty
heroes sued for my hand; the sea around that island is still filled
with the rocky fragments which they hurled against each other in their
combats. Andfind won the victory, and I plighted myself to him. But
ere I was married came the detestable Odin into the country, who
overcame my father, and drove us all from the island. My father and
sisters fled to the mountains, and since that time my eyes have beheld
them no more. Andfind and I saved ourselves on this island, where we
for a long time lived in peace and quiet, and thought it would never
be interrupted. But destiny which no one escapes, had determined it
otherwise. Oluf came from Britain. They called him the Holy, and
Andfind instantly found that his voyage would be inauspicious to the
Giants. When he heard how Oluf's ship rushed through the waves, he
went down to the strand and blew the sea against him with all his
strength. The waves swelled up like mountains. But Oluf was still
more mighty than he; his ship flew unchecked through the billows like
an arrow from a bow. He steered direct for our island. When the ship
was so near that Andfind thought he could reach it with his hands, he
grasped at the forepart with his right hand, and was about to drag it
down to the bottom, as he had often done with other ships. But Oluf,
the terrible Oluf, stepped forward, and crossing his hands over each
other, he cried with a loud voice, "Stand there as a stone till the
last day," and in the same instant my unhappy husband became a mass of
rock. The ship sailed on unimpeded, and ran direct against the
mountain, which it cut through, and separated from it the little
island which lies out yonder.
"Ever have I passed my life alone and forlorn. On Yule-eve alone can
petrified Giants receive back their life for the space of seven hours,
if one of their race embraces them, and is at the same time willing to
sacrifice a hundred years. I loved my husband too well not to bring
him back to life every time that I could do it, even at this price,
and I have not even counted how often I have done it, that I might not
know the hour when I myself should share his fate, and at the moment
when I threw my arms around him become stone like him. But, alas! even
this comfort is taken from me; I can never more by any embrace awake
him. He has heard the Name which I dare not utter, and never again
will he see the light until the dawn of the last day shall bring it.
"I now go hence, and you will behold me no more. All that is here in
the house I give you; my dulcimer alone will I keep. But let no one
venture to fix his habitation on the small islands that lie around
here. There dwell the little underground people whom you saw at the
festival, and I will protect them as long as I live!"
With these words Guru vanished. The next spring Orm took the golden
horn and the silverware to Drontheim, where no one knew him. The value
of these precious metals was so great that he was able to purchase
everything requisite for a wealthy man. He laded his ship with his
purchases, and returned back to the island, where he spent many years
in unalloyed happiness, and Aslog's father was soon reconciled to his
wealthy son-in-law.
The huge image remained sitting in the house; no human power was able
to move it. So hard was the stone, that hammer and axe flew in pieces
without making the slightest impression upon it. The giant sat there
till a holy man came to the island, who with one single word removed
him back to his former station, where he stands to this hour. The
copper kettle, which the underground people left behind them, was
preserved as a memorial upon the island, which bears the name of House
Island to the present day.
SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED.
A poor widow lived alone in a little cottage, in front of which was a
garden, where stood two little rose-trees: one bore white roses, the
other red. The widow had two children, who resembled the two
rose-trees: one was called Snow-white, and the other Rose-red. They
were two of the best children that ever lived; but Snow-white was
quieter and more gentle than Rose-red. Rose-red liked best to jump
about in the meadows, to look for flowers and catch butterflies; but
Snow-white sat at home with her mother, helped her in the house, or
read to her when there was nothing else to do. The two children loved
one another so much, that they always walked hand in hand; and when
Snow-white said, "We will not forsake one another," Rose-red answered,
"Never, as long as we live;" and the mother added, "Yes, my children,
whatever one has, let her divide with the other." They often ran about
in solitary places, and gathered red berries; and the wild creatures
of the wood never hurt them, but came confidingly up to them. The
little hare ate cabbage-leaves out of their hands, the doe grazed at
their side, the stag sprang merrily past them, and the birds remained
sitting on the boughs, and never ceased their songs. They met with no
accident if they loitered in the wood and right came on; they lay down
together on the moss, and slept till morning; and the mother knew
this, and was in no anxiety about them. Once, when they had spent the
night in the wood, and the red morning awoke them, they saw a
beautiful child in a shining white dress, sitting by the place where
they had slept, who, arising, and looking at them kindly, said
nothing, but went into the wood. And when they looked round, they
found out that they had been sleeping close to a precipice, and would
certainly have fallen down it if they had gone a few steps farther in
the dark. Their mother told them it must have been the angel that
takes care of good children who had sat by them all night long.
Snow-white and Rose-red kept their mother's cottage so clean, that it
was a pleasure to look into it. In the summer, Rose-red managed the
house, and every morning she gathered a nosegay in which was a rose
off each tree, and set it by her mother's bed before she awoke. In
winter Snow-white lighted the fire, and hung the kettle on the hook;
and though it was only copper, it shone like gold, it was rubbed so
clean. In the evening, when the snow fell, the mother said, "Go,
Snow-white, and bolt the door;" and then they seated themselves on the
hearth, and the mother took her spectacles, and read aloud out of a
great book, and the two girls listened, and sat and span. Near them
lay a lamb on the floor, and behind them, on a perch, sat a white
dove, with its head under its wing.
One evening, as they were thus happy together, some one knocked to be
let in. The mother said, "Quick, Rose-red, open the door; perhaps it
is a traveller who seeks shelter." Rose-red went and pushed the bolt
back, and thought it was a poor man, but a bear stretched his thick
black head into the door. Rose-red screamed and sprang back, the
little lamb bleated, the little dove fluttered about, and Snow-white
hid herself behind her mother's bed. However, the bear began to speak,
and said, "Do not be frightened, I will do you no harm; I am half
frozen, and only want to warm myself a little."
"You poor bear," said the mother, "lay yourself down before the fire,
only take care your fur does not burn." Then she called out,
"Snow-white and Rose-red, come out; the bear will not hurt you--he
means honestly by us." Then they both came out, and, by degrees, the
lamb and the dove also approached, and ceased to be afraid. The bear
said, "Children, knock the snow a little out of my fur;" and they
fetched a broom, and swept the bear's skin clean; and he stretched
himself before the fire and growled softly, like a bear that was quite
happy and comfortable. In a short time, they all became quite friendly
together, and the children played tricks with the awkward guest. They
pulled his hair, set their feet on his back, and rolled him here and
there; or took a hazel rod and beat him, and when he growled they
laughed. The bear was very much pleased with this frolic, only, when
they became too mischievous, he called out, "Children, leave me
alone."
    "Little Snow-white and Rose-red,
    You will strike your lover dead."
When bedtime came, and the others went to sleep, the mother said to
the bear: "You can lie there on the hearth, and then you will be
sheltered from the cold and the bad weather." At daybreak the two
children let him out, and he trotted over the snow into the wood.
Henceforward, the bear came every evening at the same hour, laid
himself on the hearth, and allowed the children to play with him as
much as they liked; and they became so used to him, that the door was
never bolted until their black companion had arrived. When spring
came, and everything was green out of doors, the bear said one morning
to Snow-white: "Now I must go away, and may not come again the whole
summer."
"Where are you going, dear Bear?" asked Snow-white.
"I must go into the wood, and guard my treasures from the bad dwarfs;
in winter, when the ground is frozen hard, they have to stay
underneath, and cannot work their way through, but now that the sun
has thawed and warmed the earth, they break through, come up, seek,
and steal: what is once in their hands, and lies in their caverns,
does not come so easily into daylight again." Snow-white was quite
sorrowful at parting, and as she unbolted the door for him, and the
bear ran out, the hook of the door caught him, and a piece of his skin
tore off; it seemed to Snow-white as if she had seen gold shining
through, but she was not sure. But the bear ran quickly away, and soon
disappeared behind the trees.
After some time, their mother sent the children into the wood to
collect faggots. They found there a large tree, which had been cut
down and lay on the ground, and by the trunk something was jumping up
and down, but they could not tell what it was. As they came nearer,
they saw that it was a dwarf, with an old withered face, and a
snow-white beard a yard long. The end of the beard was stuck fast in a
cleft in the tree, and the little fellow jumped about like a dog on a
rope, and did not know how to help himself. He stared at the girls
with his fiery red eyes, and screamed out, "Why do you stand there!
Can't you come and render me some assistance?"
"What is the matter with you, little man?" asked Rose-red.
"Stupid little goose!" answered the dwarf; "I wanted to chop the tree,
so as to have some small pieces of wood for the kitchen; we only want
little bits; with thick logs, the small quantity of food that we cook
for ourselves--we are not, like you, great greedy people--burns
directly. I had driven the wedge well in, and it was all going on
right, but the detestable wood was too smooth, and sprang out
unexpectedly; and the tree closed up so quickly, that I could not pull
my beautiful white beard out; now it is sticking there, and I can't
get away. There you foolish, soft, milk-faces! you are laughing and
crying out, 'How ugly you are! how ugly you are!'"
The children took a great deal of trouble, but they could not pull the
beard out; it stuck too fast.
"I will run and fetch somebody," said Rose red.
"You great ninny!" snarled the dwarf, "you want to call more people;
you are two too many for me now. Can't you think of anything better?"
"Only don't be impatient," said Snow-white, "I have thought of
something;" and she took her little scissors out of her pocket, and
cut the end of the beard off.
As soon as the dwarf felt himself free, he seized a sack filled with
gold that was sticking between the roots of the tree; pulling it out,
he growled to himself, "You rude people, to cut off a piece of my
beautiful beard! May evil reward you!" Then he threw his sack over his
shoulders and walked away, without once looking at the children.
Some time afterwards, Snow-white and Rose red wished to catch some
fish for dinner. As they came near to the stream, they saw that
something like a grasshopper was jumping towards the water, as if it
were going to spring in. They ran on and recognised the dwarf.
"Where are you going?" asked Rose-red, "You don't want to go into the
water?"
"I am not such a fool as that," cried the dwarf, "Don't you see the
detestable fish wants to pull me in?"
The little fellow had been sitting there fishing, and, unluckily, the
wind had entangled his beard with the line. When directly afterwards a
great fish bit at his hook, the weak creature could not pull him out,
so the fish was pulling the dwarf into the water. It is true he caught
hold of all the reeds and rushes, but that did not help him much; he
had to follow all the movements of the fish, and was in imminent
danger of being drowned. The girls, coming at the right time, held him
fast and tried to get the beard loose from the line, but in
vain--beard and line were entangled fast together. There was nothing
to do but to pull out the scissors and to cut off the beard, in doing
which a little piece of it was lost. When the dwarf saw that, he cried
out: "Is that manners, you goose! to disfigure one's face so? Is it
not enough that you once cut my beard shorter? But now you have cut
the best part of it off, I dare not be seen by my people. I wish you
had had to run, and had lost the soles of your shoes!" Then he fetched
a sack of pearls that lay among the rushes, and, without saying a word
more, he dragged it away and disappeared behind a stone.
Soon after, the mother sent the two girls to the town to buy cotton,
needles, cord, and tape. The road led them by a heath, scattered over
which lay great masses of rock. There they saw a large bird hovering
in the air; it flew round and round just above them, always sinking
lower and lower, and at last it settled down by a rock not far
distant. Directly after, they heard a piercing, wailing cry. They ran
up, and saw with horror that the eagle had seized their old
acquaintance the dwarf, and was going to carry him off. The
compassionate children instantly seized hold of the little man, held
him fast, and struggled so long that the eagle let his prey go.
When the dwarf had recovered from his first fright, he called out, in
his shrill voice: "Could not you deal rather more gently with me? You
have torn my thin coat all in tatters, awkward, clumsy creatures that
you are!" Then he took a sack of precious stones, and slipped behind
the rock again into his den. The girls, who were used to his
ingratitude, went on their way, and completed their business in the
town. As they were coming home again over the heath, they surprised
the dwarf, who had emptied his sack of precious stones on a little
clean place, and had not thought that any one would come by there so
late. The evening sun shone on the glittering stones, which looked so
beautiful in all their colours, that the children could not help
standing still to gaze.
"Why do you stand there gaping?" cried the dwarf, his ash-coloured
face turning vermilion with anger.
With these cross words he was going away, when he heard a loud
roaring, and a black bear trotted out of the wood towards them. The
dwarf sprang up terrified, but he could not get to his lurking hole
again--the bear was already close upon him. Then he called out in
anguish,--
"Dear Mr. Bear, spare me, and you shall have all my treasures; look
at the beautiful precious stones that lie there. Give me my life! for
what do you want with a poor thin little fellow like me? You would
scarcely feel me between your teeth. Rather seize those two wicked
girls; they will be tender morsels for you, as fat as young quails;
pray, eat them at once."
The bear, without troubling himself to answer, gave the malicious
creature one single stroke with his paw, and he did not move again.
The girls had run away, but the bear called after them, "Snow-white
and Rose-red, do not be frightened; wait, I will go with you.
Recognising the voice of their old friend, they stood still, and when
the bear came up to them his skin suddenly fell off; and behold he was
not a bear, but a handsome young man dressed all in gold.
"I am a king's son," said he; "I was changed by the wicked dwarf, who
had stolen all my treasures, into a wild bear, and obliged to run
about in the wood until I should be freed by his death. Now he has
received his well-deserved punishment."
So they all went home together to the widow's cottage, and Snow-white
was married to the prince, and Rose-red to his brother. They divided
between them the great treasures which the dwarf had amassed. The old
mother lived many quiet and happy years with her children; but when
she left her cottage for the palace, she took the two rose-trees with
her, and they stood before her window and bore every year the most
beautiful roses--one white and the other red.
JACK AND THE BEAN-STALK.
In the days of King Alfred, there lived a poor woman, whose cottage
was in a remote country village, many miles from London. She had been
a widow some years, and had an only child named Jack, whom she
indulged so much that he never paid the least attention to anything
she said, but was indolent, careless, and extravagant. His follies
were not owing to a bad disposition, but to his mother's foolish
partiality. By degrees, he spent all that she had--scarcely anything
remained but a cow. One day, for the first time in her life, she
reproached him: "Cruel, cruel boy! you have at last brought me to
beggary. I have not money enough to purchase even a bit of bread;
nothing now remains to sell but my poor cow! I am sorry to part with
her; it grieves me sadly, but we cannot starve." For a few minutes
Jack felt remorse, but it was soon over; and he began asking his
mother to let him sell the cow at the next village; teasing her so
much, that she at last consented. As he was going along he met a
butcher, who inquired why he was driving the cow from home? Jack
replied, he was going to sell it. The butcher held some curious beans
in his hat; they were of various colors, and attracted Jack's
attention; this did not pass unnoticed by the man, who, knowing
Jack's easy temper, thought now was the time to take an advantage of
it; and, determined not to let slip so good an opportunity, asked what
was the price of the cow, offering at the same time all the beans in
his hat for her. The silly boy could not conceal the pleasure he felt
at what he supposed so great an offer: the bargain was struck
instantly, and the cow exchanged for a few paltry beans. Jack made the
best of his way home, calling aloud to his mother before he reached
the door, thinking to surprise her.
When she saw the beans, and heard Jack's account, her patience quite
forsook her: she tossed the beans out of the window, where they fell
on the garden-bed below. Then she threw her apron over her head, and
cried bitterly. Jack attempted to console her, but in vain, and, not
having anything to eat, they both went supperless to bed. Jack awoke
early in the morning, and seeing something uncommon darkening the
window of his bedchamber, ran downstairs into the garden, where he
found some of the beans had taken root, and sprung up surprisingly:
the stalks were of an immense thickness, and had twined together until
they formed a ladder like a chain, and so high that the top appeared
to be lost in the clouds. Jack was an adventurous lad; he determined
to climb up to the top, and ran to tell his mother, not doubting but
that she would be equally pleased with himself. She declared he should
not go; said it would break her heart if he did--entreated and
threatened, but all in vain. Jack set out, and after climbing for
some hours, reached the top of the bean-stalk, quite exhausted.
Looking around, he found himself in a strange country; it appeared to
be a barren desert--not a tree, shrub, house, or living creature was
to be seen; here and there were scattered fragments of stone; and at
unequal distances, small heaps of earth were loosely thrown together.
Jack seated himself pensively upon a block of stone, and thought of
his mother; he reflected with sorrow upon his disobedience in climbing
the bean-stalk against her will, and concluded that he must die of
hunger. However, he walked on, hoping to see a house, where he might
beg something to eat and drink. He did not find it; but he saw at a
distance a beautiful lady, walking all alone. She was elegantly clad,
and carried a white wand, at the top of which sat a peacock of pure
gold.
Jack, who was a gallant fellow, went straight up to her; when, with a
bewitching smile, she asked him how he came there. He told her all
about the bean-stalk. The lady answered him by a question, "Do you
remember your father, young man?"
"No, madam; but I am sure there is some mystery about him, for when I
name him to my mother she always begins to weep, and will tell me
"She dare not," replied the lady, "but I can and will. For know, young
man, that I am a fairy, and was your father's guardian. But fairies
are bound by laws as well as mortals; and by an error of mine I lost
my power for a term of years, so that I was unable to succour your
father when he most needed it, and he died." Here the fairy looked so
sorrowful that Jack's heart warmed to her, and he begged her earnestly
to tell him more.
"I will; only you must promise to obey me in everything, or you will
perish yourself."
Jack was brave, and, besides, his fortunes were so bad they could not
well be worse--so he promised.
The fairy continued: "Your father, Jack, was a most excellent,
amiable, generous man. He had a good wife, faithful servants, plenty
of money; but he had one misfortune--a false friend. This was a giant,
whom he had succoured in misfortune, and who returned his kindness by
murdering him, and seizing on all his property; also making your
mother take a solemn oath that she would never tell you anything about
your father, or he would murder both her and you. Then he turned her
off with you in her arms, to wander about the wide world as she might.
I could not help her, as my power only returned on the day you went to
sell your cow."
"It was I," added the fairy, "who impelled you to take the beans, who
made the bean-stalk grow, and inspired you with the desire to climb up
it to this strange country; for it is here the wicked giant lives who
was your father's destroyer. It is you who must avenge him, and rid
the world of a monster who never will do anything but evil. I will
assist you. You may lawfully take possession of his house and all his
riches, for everything he has belonged to your father, and is
therefore yours. Now farewell! Do not let your mother know you are
acquainted with your father's history; this is my command, and if you
disobey me you will suffer for it. Now go."
Jack asked where he was to go.
"Along the direct road, till you see the house where the giant lives.
You must then act according to your own just judgment, and I will
guide you if any difficulty arises. Farewell!"
She bestowed on the youth a benignant smile, and vanished.
Jack pursued his journey. He walked on till after sunset, when to his
great joy, he espied a large mansion. A plain-looking woman was at the
door: he accosted her, begging she would give him a morsel of bread
and a night's lodging. She expressed the greatest surprise, and said
it was quite uncommon to see a human being near their house; for it
was well known that her husband was a powerful giant, who would never
eat anything but human flesh, if he could possibly get it; that he
would walk fifty miles to procure it, usually being out the whole day
for that purpose.
This account greatly terrified Jack, but still he hoped to elude the
giant, and therefore he again entreated the woman to take him in for
one night only, and hide him where she thought proper. She at last
suffered herself to be persuaded, for she was of a compassionate and
generous disposition, and took him into the house. First, they entered
a fine large hall, magnificently furnished; they then passed through
several spacious rooms, in the same style of grandeur; but all
appeared forsaken and desolate. A long gallery came next; it was very
dark--just light enough to show that, instead of a wall on one side,
there was a grating of iron which parted off a dismal dungeon, from
whence issued the groans of those victims whom the cruel giant
reserved in confinement for his own voracious appetite. Poor Jack was
half dead with fear, and would have given the world to have been with
his mother again, for he now began to doubt if he should ever see her
more; he even mistrusted the good woman, and thought she had let him
into the house for no other purpose than to lock him up among the
unfortunate people in the dungeon. However, she bade Jack sit down,
and gave him plenty to eat and drink; and he, not seeing anything to
make him uncomfortable, soon forgot his fear and was just beginning to
enjoy himself, when he was startled by a loud knocking at the outer
door, which made the whole house shake.
"Ah! that's the giant; and if he sees you he will kill you and me
too," cried the poor woman, trembling all over. "What shall I do?"
"Hide me in the oven," cried Jack, now as bold as a lion at the
thought of being face to face with his father's cruel murderer. So he
crept into the oven--for there was no fire near it--and listened to
the giant's loud voice and heavy step as he went up and down the
kitchen scolding his wife. At last he seated himself at table, and
Jack, peeping through a crevice in the oven, was amazed to see what a
quantity of food he devoured. It seemed as if he never would have done
eating and drinking; but he did at last, and, leaning back, called to
his wife in a voice like thunder:
"Bring me my hen!"
She obeyed, and placed upon the table a very beautiful live hen.
"Lay!" roared the giant, and the hen laid immediately an egg of solid
"Lay another!" and every time the giant said this the hen laid a
larger egg than before.
He amused himself a long time with his hen, and then sent his wife to
bed, while he fell asleep by the fireside, and snored like the roaring
of cannon.
As soon as he was asleep, Jack crept out of the oven, seized the hen,
and ran off with her. He got safely out of the house, and finding his
way along the road he came, reached the top of the bean-stalk, which
he descended in safety.
His mother was overjoyed to see him. She thought he had come to some
ill end.
"Not a bit of it, mother. Look here!" and he showed her the hen. "Now
lay;" and the hen obeyed him as readily as the giant, and laid as many
golden eggs as he desired.
These eggs being sold, Jack and his mother got plenty of money, and
for some months lived very happily together; till Jack got another
great longing to climb the bean-stalk, and carry away some more of the
giant's riches. He had told his mother of his adventure, but had been
very careful not to say a word about his father. He thought of his
journey again and again, but still he could not summon resolution
enough to break it to his mother, being well assured that she would
endeavour to prevent his going. However, one day he told her boldly,
that he must take another journey up the bean-stalk; she begged and
prayed him not to think of it, and tried all in her power to dissuade
him. She told him that the giant's wife would certainly know him
again, and that the giant would desire nothing better than to get him
into his power, that he might put him to a cruel death, in order to be
revenged for the loss of his hen. Jack, finding that all his arguments
were useless, ceased speaking, though resolved to go at all events. He
had a dress prepared which would disguise him, and something to colour
his skin; he thought it impossible for any one to recollect him in
this dress.
A few mornings after, he rose very early, and, unperceived by any one,
climbed the bean-stalk a second time. He was greatly fatigued when he
reached the top, and very hungry. Having rested some time on one of
the stones, he pursued his journey to the giant's mansion, which he
reached late in the evening: the woman was at the door as before. Jack
addressed her, at the same time telling her a pitiful tale, and
requesting that she would give him some victuals and drink, and also a
She told him (what he knew before very well) about her husband's being
a powerful and cruel giant, and also that she had one night admitted a
poor, hungry, friendless boy; that the little ungrateful fellow had
stolen one of the giant's treasures; and ever since that her husband
had been worse than before, using her very cruelly, and continually
upbraiding her with being the cause of his misfortune. Jack felt sorry
for her, but confessed nothing, and did his best to persuade her to
admit him, but found it a very hard task. At last she consented, and
as she led the way, Jack observed that everything was just as he had
found it before: she took him into the kitchen, and after he had done
eating and drinking, she hid him in an old lumber-closet. The giant
returned at the usual time, and walked in so heavily, that the house
was shaken to its foundation. He seated himself by the fire, and soon
after exclaimed: "Wife, I smell fresh meat!"
The wife replied it was the crows, which had brought a piece of raw
meat, and left it at the top of the house. While supper was preparing,
the giant was very ill-tempered and impatient, frequently lifting up
his hand to strike his wife for not being quick enough. He was also
continually upbraiding her with the loss of his wonderful hen.
At last, having ended his supper, he cried, "Give me something to
amuse me--my harp or my money-bags."
"Which will you have, my dear?" said the wife, humbly.
"My money-bags, because they are the heaviest to carry," thundered he.
She brought them, staggering under the weight: two bags--one filled
with new guineas, and the other with new shillings; she emptied them
out on the table, and the giant began counting them in great glee.
"Now you may go to bed, you old fool." So the wife crept away.
Jack from his hiding-place watched the counting of the money, which he
knew was his poor father's, and wished it was his own; it would give
him much less trouble than going about selling the golden eggs. The
giant, little thinking he was so narrowly observed, reckoned it all
up, and then replaced it in the two bags, which he tied up very
carefully and put beside his chair, with his little dog to guard them.
At last he fell asleep as before, and snored so loud, that Jack
compared his noise to the roaring of the sea in a high wind, when the
tide is coming in. At last Jack, concluding all secure, stole out, in
order to carry off the two bags of money; but just as he laid his hand
upon one of them, the little dog, which he had not perceived before,
started from under the giant's chair and barked most furiously.
Instead of endeavouring to escape, Jack stood still, though expecting
his enemy to awake every instant. Contrary, however, to his
expectation, the giant continued in a sound sleep, and Jack, seeing a
piece of meat, threw it to the dog, who at once ceased barking, and
began to devour it. So Jack carried off the bags, one on each
shoulder, but they were so heavy that it took him two whole days to
descend the bean-stalk and get back to his mother's door.
When he came he found the cottage deserted. He ran from one room to
another, without being able to find any one; he then hastened into the
village, hoping to see some of the neighbours, who could inform him
where he could find his mother. An old woman at last directed him to a
neighbouring house, where she was ill of a fever. He was greatly
shocked at finding her apparently dying, and blamed himself bitterly
as the cause of it all. However, at sight of her dear son, the poor
woman revived, and slowly recovered health. Jack gave her his two
money-bags; they had the cottage rebuilt and well furnished, and lived
happier than they had ever done before.
For three years Jack heard no more of the bean-stalk, but he could not
forget it, though he feared making his mother unhappy. It was in vain
endeavouring to amuse himself; he became thoughtful, and would arise
at the first dawn of day, and sit looking at the bean-stalk for hours
together. His mother saw that something preyed upon his mind, and
endeavoured to discover the cause; but Jack knew too well what the
consequence would be should she succeed. He did his utmost, therefore,
to conquer the great desire he had for another journey up the
bean-stalk. Finding, however, that his inclination grew too powerful
for him, he began to make secret preparations for his journey. He got
ready a new disguise, better and more complete than the former; and
when summer came, on the longest day he awoke as soon as it was light,
and without telling his mother, ascended the bean-stalk. He found the
road, journey, &c., much as it was on the two former times. He arrived
at the giant's mansion in the evening, and found the wife standing, as
usual, at the door. Jack had disguised himself so completely, that she
did not appear to have the least recollection of him; however, when he
pleaded hunger and poverty, in order to gain admittance, he found it
very difficult indeed to persuade her. At last he prevailed, and was
concealed in the copper. When the giant returned, he said furiously,
"I smell fresh meat!" But Jack felt quite composed, as he had said so
before, and had been soon satisfied. However, the giant started up
suddenly, and, notwithstanding all his wife could say, he searched all
round the room. Whilst this was going forward, Jack was exceedingly
terrified, wishing himself at home a thousand times; but when the
giant approached the copper, and put his hand upon the lid, Jack
thought his death was certain. However, nothing happened; for the
giant did not take the trouble to lift up the lid, but sat down
shortly by the fireside, and began to eat his enormous supper. When he
had finished, he commanded his wife to fetch down his harp. Jack
peeped under the copper-lid, and saw a most beautiful harp. The giant
placed it on the table, said "Play!" and it played of its own accord,
without anybody touching it, the most exquisite music imaginable.
Jack, who was a very good musician, was delighted, and more anxious to
get this than any other of his enemy's treasures. But the giant not
being particularly fond of music, the harp had only the effect of
lulling him to sleep earlier than usual. As for the wife, she had gone
to bed as soon as ever she could.
As soon as he thought all was safe, Jack got out of the copper, and
seizing the harp, was eagerly running off with it. But the harp was
enchanted by a fairy, and as soon as it found itself in strange hands,
it called out loudly, just as if it had been alive, "Master! Master!"
The giant awoke, started up, and saw Jack scampering away as fast as
his legs could carry him.
"Oh you villain! it is you who have robbed me of my hen and my
money-bags, and now you are stealing my harp also. Wait till I catch
you, and I'll eat you up alive!"
"Very well; try!" shouted Jack, who was not a bit afraid, for he saw
the giant was so tipsy he could hardly stand, much less run; and he
himself had young legs and a clear conscience, which carry a man a
long way. So, after leading the giant a considerable race, he
contrived to be first at the top of the bean-stalk, and then scrambled
down it as fast as he could, the harp playing all the while the most
melancholy music till he said, "Stop," and it stopped.
Arrived at the bottom, he found his mother sitting at her
cottage-door, weeping silently.
"Here, mother, don't cry; just give me a hatchet; make haste." For he
knew there was not a moment to spare; he saw the giant beginning to
descend the bean-stalk.
However, it was too late--the monster's ill deeds had come to an end.
Jack with his hatchet cut the bean-stalk close off at the root; the
giant fell headlong into the garden, and was killed on the spot.
Instantly the fairy appeared, and explained everything to Jack's
mother, begging her to forgive Jack, who was his father's own son for
bravery and generosity, and who would be sure to make her happy for
the rest of her days.
So all ended well, and nothing was ever beard or seen of the wonderful
Bean-stalk.
GRACIOSA AND PERCINET.
Once upon a time there lived a king and queen, who had an only
daughter. Her incomparable beauty, sweetness, and intelligence caused
her to be named Graciosa. She was all her mother's joy. Every day she
had given her a different dress, of gold brocade, velvet, or satin;
yet she was neither conceited nor boastful. She used to pass her
mornings in study, and in the afternoon she sat sewing by the queen's
side. She had, however, plenty of play-time, and sweetmeats without
end, so that she was altogether the happiest princess alive.
At the same court was an elderly young lady named Duchess Grognon, who
was the very opposite of Graciosa. Her hair was fiery red, her face
fat and spotty, and she had but one eye. Her mouth was so big that you
might have thought she could eat you up, only she had no teeth to do
it with; she was also humpbacked and lame. Of course she could not
help her ugliness, and nobody would have disliked her for that, if she
had not been of such an unpleasant temper that she hated everything
sweet and beautiful, and especially Graciosa. She had also a very good
opinion of herself, and when any one praised the princess, would say
angrily, "That is a lie! My little finger is worth her whole body."
In course of time the queen fell sick and died, and her daughter was
almost broken-hearted. So was her husband for a year, and then he
began to comfort himself by hunting. One day, after a long chase, he
came to a strange castle, which happened to be that of the Duchess
Grognon. She, informed of his approach, went out to meet him, and
received him most respectfully. As he was very hot with hunting, she
took him into the coolest place in the palace, which was a vaulted
cave, most elegantly furnished, where there were two hundred barrels
arranged in long rows.
"Madam, are these all yours?" inquired the king.
"Yes, sire, but I shall be most happy if you will condescend to taste
their contents. Which wine do you prefer--canary, hermitage,
champagne?" and she ran over a long list, out of which his majesty
made his choice.
Grognon took a little hammer, and struck "toc, toc," on the cask, from
which there rolled out a handful of silver money. "Nay, what is this?"
said she, smiling, and passed on to the next, from which, when she
tapped it, out poured a stream of gold coins. "I never saw the
like--what nonsense!" and she tried the third, out of which came a
heap of pearls and diamonds, so that the floor of the cave was strewn
with them. "Sire," she exclaimed, "some one has robbed me of my good
wine, and put this rubbish in its place."
"Rubbish, madam! Why, such rubbish would buy my whole kingdom."
"It is yours, sire," replied the duchess, "if you will make me your
queen."
The king, who was a great lover of money, replied eagerly, "Certainly,
madam, I'll marry you to-morrow if you will."
Grognon, highly delighted, made but one other condition--that she
should have the Princess Graciosa entirely in her own rule and power,
just as if she had been her real mother; to which the foolish king
consented, for he thought much more of riches than he did of his
child. So he and Grognon departed hand in hand out of the cave, very
well pleased.
When the king returned home, Graciosa ran out with joy to welcome her
father, and asked him if he had had good sport in his hunting.
"Yes, my child," said he, "for I have taken a dove alive."
"Oh, give it me, and I will nourish and cherish it," cried the
"That is impossible; for it is the Duchess Grognon, whom I have
promised to marry."
"She a dove!--she is rather a hawk," sighed the princess in despair;
but her father bade her hold her tongue, and promise to love her
stepmother, who would have over her all the authority of a mother, and
to whom he wished to present her that very day.
The obedient princess went to her apartment, where her nurse soon
found out the sorrow in her face, and its cause.
"My child," said the good old woman, "princesses ought to show a good
example to humbler women. Promise me to do your best to please your
father, and to make yourself agreeable to the stepmother he has
chosen for you. She may not be so bad after, all."
And the nurse gave so much good advice, that Graciosa began to smile,
and dressed herself in her best attire, a green robe embroidered with
gold; while her fair, loose-falling hair was adorned, according to the
fashion of the day, with a coronet of jasmine, of which the leaves
were made of large emeralds.
Grognon, on her part, made the best of herself that was possible. She
put on a high-heeled shoe to appear less lame, she padded her
shoulders, dyed her red hair black, and put in a false eye; then
dressed herself in a hooped petticoat of violet satin trimmed with
blue, and an upper gown of yellow with green ribands. In this costume,
she wished to enter the city on horseback, as she understood the
queens were in the habit of doing.
Meantime, Graciosa waited in fear the moment of her arrival, and, to
pass the time away, she went all alone into a little wood, where she
sobbed and wept in secret, until suddenly there appeared before her a
young page, whom she had never seen before.
"Who are you?" she inquired; "and when did his majesty take you into
his service?"
"Princess," said the page, bowing, "I am in no one's service but your
own. I am Percinet, a prince in my own country, so that there is no
inequality of rank between us. I have loved you long, and seen you
often, for I have the fairy gift of making myself invisible. I might
longer have concealed myself from you, but for your present sorrow,
in which, however, I hope to be of both comfort and assistance--a page
and yet a prince, and your faithful lover."
At these words, at once tender and respectful, the princess, who had
long heard of the fairy-prince Percinet, felt so happy that she feared
Grognon no more. They talked a little while together, and then
returned to the palace, where the page assisted her to mount her
horse; on which she looked so beautiful, that all the new queen's
splendours faded into nothing in comparison, and not one of the
courtiers had eyes for any except Graciosa.
As soon as Grognon saw it, "What!" cried she, "has this creature the
impudence to be better mounted than myself! Descend, Miss, and let me
try your horse;--and your page, whom everybody thinks so much of, bid
him come and hold my bridle."
Prince Percinet, who was the page, cast one look at his fair Graciosa
and obeyed; but no sooner had the duchess mounted, than the horse ran
away with her and dragged her over briers, stones, and mud, and
finally threw her into a deep ditch. Her head was cut in several
places, and her arm fractured. They picked her up in little pieces,
like a broken wineglass; never was there a poor bride in worse plight.
But in spite of her sufferings her malice remained. She sent for the
king:
"This is all Graciosa's fault; she wished to kill me. I desire that
your majesty will punish her, or leave me to do it--else I will
certainly be revenged upon you both."
The king, afraid of losing his casks full of gold pieces, consented,
and Graciosa was commanded to appear. She came trembling and looking
round vainly for Prince Percinet. The cruel Grognon ordered four
women, ugly as witches, to take her and strip off her fine clothes,
and whip her with rods till her white shoulders were red with blood.
But lo! as soon as the rods touched her, they turned into bundles of
feathers, and the women tired themselves to death with whipping,
without hurting Graciosa the least in the world!
"Ah! kind Percinet, what do I not owe you? What should I do without
you!" sighed the princess, when she was taken back to her own chamber
and her nurse. And then she saw the prince standing before her, in his
green dress and his white plume, the most charming of pages.
Percinet advised her to pretend illness on account of the cruel
treatment she was supposed to have received; which so delighted
Grognon, that she got well all the sooner, and the marriage was
celebrated with great splendour.
Soon after, the king, who knew that his wife's weak point was her
vanity, gave a tournament, at which he ordered the six bravest knights
of the court to proclaim that Queen Grognon was the fairest lady
alive. No knight ventured to dispute this fact, until there appeared
one who carried a little box adorned with diamonds, and proclaimed
aloud that Grognon was the ugliest woman in the universe, and that the
most beautiful was she whose portrait was in the box. He opened it,
and behold the image of the Princess Graciosa!
The princess, who sat behind her stepmother, felt sure that the
unknown knight was Percinet; but she dared say nothing. The contest
was fixed for next day; but in the meantime, Grognon, wild with anger,
commanded Graciosa to be taken in the middle of the night to a forest
a hundred leagues distant, full of wolves, lions, tigers, and bears.
In vain the poor maiden implored that the attendants would kill her at
once, rather than leave her in that dreadful place: the queen's orders
must be obeyed; no answer was made to her, but the servants remounted
and rode away. Graciosa, in solitude and darkness, groped through the
forest, sometimes falling against the trunks of trees, sometimes
tearing herself with bushes and briers; at last, overcome with fear
and grief, she sank on the ground, sobbing out, "Percinet, Percinet,
have you forsaken me?"
While she spoke, a bright light dazzled her eyes, the midnight forest
was changed into glittering alleys, at the end of which appeared a
palace of crystal, shining like the sun. She knew it was the doing of
the fairy-prince who loved her, and felt a joy mingled with fear. She
turned to fly, but saw him standing before her, more handsome and
charming than ever.
"Princess," said he, "why are you afraid of me? This is the palace of
the fairy-queen my mother, and the princesses my sisters, who will
take care of you, and love you tenderly. Enter this chariot, and I
will convey you there."
Graciosa entered, and passing through many a lovely forest glade,
where it was clear daylight, and shepherds and shepherdesses were
dancing to merry music, they reached the palace, where the queen and
her two daughters received the forlorn princess with great kindness,
and led her through many rooms of rock-crystal, glittering with
jewels, where, to her amazement, Graciosa saw the history of her own
life, even down to this adventure in the forest, painted on the walls.
"How is this?" she said. "Prince, you know everything about me."
"Yes; and I wish to preserve everything concerning you," said he
tenderly; whereupon Graciosa cast down her eyes. She was only too
happy, and afraid that she should learn to love the fairy-prince too
much.
She spent eight days in his palace--days full of every enjoyment; and
Percinet tried all the arguments he could think of to induce her to
marry him, and remain there for ever. But the good and gentle Graciosa
remembered her father who was once so kind to her, and she preferred
rather to suffer than to be wanting in duty. She entreated Percinet to
use his fairy power to send her home again, and meantime to tell her
what had become of her father.
"Come with me into the great tower there, and you shall see for
Thereupon he took her to the top of a tower, prodigiously high, put
her little finger to his lips, and her foot upon his foot. Then he
bade her look, and she saw as hi a picture, or as in a play upon the
stage, the King and Grognon sitting together on their throne. The
latter was telling how Graciosa had hanged herself in a cave.
"She will not be much loss, sire; and as, when dead, she was far too
frightful for you to look at, I have given orders to bury her at
She might well say that, for she had had a large faggot put into a
coffin, and sealed up; the king and all the nation mourned over it;
and now, that she was no more, they declared there never was such a
sweet creature as the lost princess.
The sight of her father's grief quite overcame Graciosa. "Oh,
Percinet!" she cried, "my father believes me dead. If you love me,
take me home."
The prince consented, though very sorrowfully, saying that she was as
cruel to him as Grognon was to her, and mounted with her in his
chariot, drawn by four white stags. As they quitted the courtyard,
they heard a great noise, and Graciosa saw the palace all falling to
pieces with a great crash.
"What is this?" she cried, terrified.
"Princess, my palace, which you forsake, is among the things which are
dead and gone. You will enter it no more till after your burial."
"Prince, you are angry with me," said Graciosa sorrowfully; only she
knew well that she suffered quite as much as he did in thus departing
and quitting him.
Arrived in her father's presence, she had great difficulty in
persuading him that she was not a ghost, until the coffin with the
faggot inside it was taken up, and Grognon's malice discovered But
even then, the king was so weak a man, that the queen soon made him
believe he had been cheated, that the princess was really dead, and
that this was a false Graciosa. Without more ado, he abandoned his
daughter to her stepmother's will.
Grognon, transported with joy, dragged her to a dark prison, took away
her clothes, made her dress in rags, feed on bread and water, and
sleep upon straw. Forlorn and hopeless, Graciosa dared not now call
upon Percinet; she doubted if he still loved her enough to come to her
aid.
Meantime, Grognon had sent for a fairy, who was scarcely less
malicious than herself. "I have here," said she, "a little wretch of a
girl for whom I wish to find all sorts of difficult tasks; pray assist
me in giving her a new one every day."
The fairy promised to think of it, and soon brought a skein as thick
as four persons, yet composed of thread so fine, that it broke if you
only blew upon it, and so tangled that it had neither beginning nor
end. Grognon, delighted, sent for her poor prisoner.
"There, miss, teach your clumsy fingers to unwind this skein, and if
you break a single thread I will flay you alive. Begin when you like,
but you must finish at sunset, or it will be the worse for you." Then
she sent her to her miserable cell, and treble-locked the door.
Graciosa stood dismayed, turning the skein over and over, and breaking
hundreds of threads each time. "Ah! Percinet," she cried in despair,
"come and help me, or at least receive my last farewell."
Immediately Percinet stood beside her, having entered the cell as
easily as if he carried the key in his pocket. "Behold me, princess,
ready to serve you, even though you forsook me." He touched the skein
with his wand, and it untangled itself, and wound itself up in perfect
order. "Do you wish anything more, madam?" asked he coldly.
"Percinet, Percinet, do not reproach me; I am only too unhappy."
"It is your own fault. Come with me, and make us both happy." But she
said nothing, and the fairy-prince disappeared.
At sunset, Grognon eagerly came to the prison-door with her three
keys, and found Graciosa smiling and fair, her task all done. There
was no complaint to make, yet Grognon exclaimed that the skein was
dirty, and boxed the princess's ears till her rosy cheeks turned
yellow and blue. Then she left her, and overwhelmed the fairy with
reproaches.
"Find me, by to-morrow, something absolutely impossible for her to
do."
The fairy brought a great basket full of feathers, plucked from every
kind of bird--nightingales, canaries, linnets, larks, doves, thrushes,
peacocks, ostriches, pheasants, partridges, magpies, eagles--in fact,
if I told them all over, I should never come to an end; and all these
feathers were so mixed up together, that they could not be
distinguished.
"See," said the fairy, "even one of ourselves would find it difficult
to separate these, and arrange them as belonging to each sort of bird.
Command your prisoner to do it; she is sure to fail."
Grognon jumped for joy, sent for the princess, and ordered her to take
her task, and finish it, as before, by set of sun.
Graciosa tried patiently, but she could see no difference in the
feathers; she threw them all back again into the basket, and began to
weep bitterly. "Let me die," said she, "for death only will end my
sorrows. Percinet loves me no longer; if he did, he would already have
been here."
"Here I am, my princess," cried a voice from under the basket; and the
fairy-prince appeared. He gave three taps with his wand--the feathers
flew by millions out of the basket, and arranged themselves in little
heaps, each belonging to a different bird.
"What do I not owe you?" cried Graciosa.
"Love me!" answered the prince, tenderly, and said no more.
When Grognon arrived, she found the task done. She was furious at the
fairy, who was as much astonished as herself at the result of their
malicious contrivances. But she promised to try once more; and for
several days employed all her industry in inventing a box, which, she
said, the prisoner must be forbidden on any account to open. "Then,"
added the cunning fairy, "of course, being such a disobedient and
wicked girl, as you say, she will open it, and the result will
satisfy you to your heart's content."
Grognon took the box, and commanded Graciosa to carry it to her
castle, and set it on a certain table, in an apartment she named, but
not upon any account, to open it or examine its contents.
Graciosa departed. She was dressed like any poor peasant, in a cotton
gown, a woollen hood and wooden shoes; yet, as she walked along,
people took her for a queen in disguise, so lovely were her looks and
ways. But being weak with imprisonment, she soon grew weary, and,
sitting down upon the edge of a little wood, took the box upon her
lap. Suddenly a wonderful desire seized her to open it.
"I will take nothing out, I will touch nothing," said she to herself,
"but I must see what is inside."
Without reflecting on the consequences, she lifted up the lid, and
instantly there jumped out a number of little men and little women,
carrying little tables and chairs, little dishes, and little musical
instruments. The whole company were so small, that the biggest giant
among them was scarcely the height of a finger. They leaped into the
green meadow, separated into various bands, and began dancing and
singing, eating and drinking, to Graciosa's wonder and delight. But
when she recollected herself, and wished to get them into the box
again, they all scampered away, played at hide-and-seek in the wood,
and by no means could she catch a single one.
Again, in her distress, she called upon Percinet, and again he
appeared; and, with a single touch of his wand, sent all the little
people back into the box. Then, in his chariot, drawn by stags, he
took her to the castle, where she did all that she had been commanded,
and returned in safety, to her stepmother, who was more furious than
ever. If a fairy could be strangled, Grognon certainly would have done
it in her rage. At last, she resolved to ask help no more, but to work
her own wicked will upon Graciosa.
She caused to be dug a large hole in the garden, and taking the
princess there, showed her the stone which covered it.
"Underneath this stone lies a great treasure; lift it up, and you will
see."
Graciosa obeyed; and while she was standing at the edge of the pit,
Grognon pushed her in, and let the stone fall down again upon her,
burying her alive. After this, there seemed no more hope for the poor
"O Percinet," cried she, "you are avenged. Why did I not return your
love, and marry you! Still, death will be less bitter, if only you
regret me a little."
While she spoke, she saw through the blank darkness a glimmer of
light; it came through a little door. She remembered what Percinet had
said: that she would never return to the fairy palace, until after she
was buried. Perhaps this final cruelty of Grognon would be the end of
her sorrows. So she took courage, crept through the little door, and
lo! she came out into a beautiful garden, with long alleys,
fruit-trees, and flower-beds. Well she knew it, and well she knew the
glitter of the rock-crystal walls. And there, at the palace-gate,
stood Percinet, and the queen, his mother, and the princesses, his
sisters. "Welcome, Graciosa!" cried they all; and Graciosa, after all
her sufferings, wept for joy.
The marriage was celebrated with great splendour; and all the fairies,
for a thousand leagues round, attended it. Some came in chariots drawn
by dragons, or swans, or peacocks; some were mounted upon floating
clouds, or globes of fire. Among the rest, appeared the very fairy who
had assisted Grognon to torment Graciosa. When she discovered that
Grognon's poor prisoner was now Prince Percinet's bride, she was
overwhelmed with confusion, and entreated her to forget all that had
passed, because she really was ignorant who she had been so cruelly
afflicting.
"But I will make amends for all the evil that I have done," said the
fairy; and, refusing to stay for the wedding-dinner, she remounted her
chariot, drawn by two terrible serpents, and flew to the palace of
Graciosa's father. There, before either king, or courtiers, or
ladies-in-waiting could stop her--even had they wished to do it, which
remains doubtful--she came behind the wicked Grognon, and twisted her
neck, just as a cook does a barn-door fowl. So Grognon died and was
buried, and nobody was particularly sorry for the same.
THE IRON STOVE.
In the days when magic was still of some avail, a king's son was
enchanted by an old witch, and compelled to spend his life sitting
inside a great Iron Stove in a wood. There he passed many years, and
nobody could release him.
Once a king's daughter came into the wood. She had gone astray, and
could not find her father's kingdom again; and having wandered about
for nine days, at last she stood before the Iron Stove. Then a voice
came out of it, and said, "Whence do you come, and where do you want
to go?"
She answered, "I have wandered from my father's kingdom, and lost
myself, and cannot get home again."
Then the voice spoke out of the Iron Stove: "I will help you home
again, and that, too, in a short time, if you will promise to do what
I desire. I am a greater prince than you are a princess, and I wish to
marry you."
She was very much frightened, and thought, "Oh, what shall I do! How
can I marry an Iron Stove?"
However, as she wanted very much to go home to her father, she
promised what was demanded of her. "Very well," said the voice "you
must come again, and bring a knife with you, and scrape a hole in the
iron."
And the Iron Stove gave her for a companion something, or
somebody--she was not quite sure what--who walked by her side and did
not speak, but took her safe home within two hours. Then there was
great joy in her father's palace, and the old king fell on her neck,
and kissed her many times. But she was very sorrowful, and said: "Dear
father, you little know what has happened to me; I should never have
come home again out of the great wild wood, if I had not passed by an
Iron Stove. But I had to promise faithfully that I would return back
to it, and marry it."
The old king was so terrified that he nearly fell into a swoon; for he
had only this one child. They therefore consulted together, and
decided to send, not the princess, but a miller's daughter, who was
very beautiful; and leading her out, they gave her a knife, and told
her how she was to scrape the Iron Stove. When she reached the wood,
she scraped away for four-and-twenty hours, but could not make the
slightest impression. But when day began to break, a voice in the Iron
Stove called out, "It seems to me that it is day out there."
She answered: "It seems so to me too; I think I hear my father's mill
turning."
"Oh, then, you are a miller's daughter; go straight back and send the
king's daughter here!"
Then she returned and told the old king that the Iron Stove would not
have her; he wanted the princess only. The old king was greatly
frightened, and the princess wept. But they had still a swineherd's
daughter, who was still more beautiful than the miller's girl; so they
gave her a piece of gold, in order that she might be persuaded to go,
instead of the king's daughter, to the Iron Stove. She was taken to
the wood as before, and had also to scrape for four-and-twenty hours;
but she could make no impression.
Now, when dawn broke, a voice called out of the Stove, "It seems to me
it is day out there."
Then she answered, "It seems so to me too; I think I hear my father's
little horn sounding."
"So you are the swineherd's daughter; go away directly, and bid the
king's daughter come, and tell her it shall happen to her as I
forewarned her; if she does not come, everything in the kingdom shall
fall to pieces and tumble down, and no stone remain upon another."
When the king's daughter heard this, she began to cry; but there was
nothing else to be done--she must keep her promise. She took leave of
her father, put a knife in her pocket, and went out to the Iron Stove
in the wood. When she arrived there, she began to scrape and scrape;
the iron yielded, and in two hours she had already scraped a little
hole. She looked in and saw a most beautiful youth: oh! he shone so
with gold and precious stones, that he pleased her to the very bottom
of her heart. She scraped away faster than ever, till she made the
hole so large that he was able to get out.
Then he said, "You are mine, and I am yours, you have freed me, and
you are my bride."
He wished to take her home to his kingdom, but she begged that she
might go once more to see her father; and the prince gave her leave,
on condition that she should speak no more than three words with him,
and come back again. So she went home; but, alas! being a little
chatter-box, she spoke more than three words. The Iron Stove
disappeared instantly, and was removed far away, over glass mountains
and sharp swords; but the king's son, being now freed, was not shut up
in it.
The princess took leave of her father, and took some money with her,
but not much, and went again into the great wood. There she looked
everywhere for the Iron Stove, but it was not to be found.
She sought it for nine days, until her hunger was so great that she
did not know what to do; for she had eaten all the food she could
find, and had nothing left to keep her alive. At evening-tide she
climbed up into a little tree, and purposed spending the night there,
for fear of the wild beasts. But when midnight came she saw afar off a
little glimmering light, and thinking, "Oh! there I should be safe,"
climbed down and went towards it.
Then she came to a little old house, overgrown with grass, with a
little heap of wood before the door. Wondering how it came there, she
looked in through the window, and saw nothing inside but a number of
fat little frogs, and a table beautifully spread. There were on it
roast meats and wines, and the plates and cups were all of silver. So
she took heart, and knocked. Immediately the fattest frog called out--
    "Maiden sweet and small,
    Hutzelbein I call;
      Hutzelbein's little dog.
    Creep about and see
    Who this can be."
Then a little frog came and opened the door for her; and as soon as
she came in, the frogs all bade her welcome, and persuaded her to sit
down. They asked--"Whence do you come? where do you want to go?"
Then she told them all that had happened to her, and how, because she
had disobeyed the command not to speak to her father more than three
words, the Stove had disappeared, as well as the king's son; now she
was determined to seek him, and to wander over mountain and valley
till she found him.
The old fat frog said--
      Hutzelbein's little dog,
    Creep about and see;
    Bring the great box to me."
Then the little frog went and brought the box. Afterwards they gave
the princess food and drink, and took her to a beautifully-made bed,
all of silk and velvet; she laid herself in it, and slept peacefully.
When day came she arose, and the old frog gave her three needles out
of the great box, and told her to take them with her. They would be
very necessary to her, for she would have to go over a high glass
mountain, and three sharp swords, and a great sea; if she passed all
those, she would recover her dearest prince. The frog also gave her,
besides the three needles, other gifts, which she was to take great
care of--namely, a plough-wheel, and three nuts.
With these she set off, and when she came to the slippery glass
mountain, she stuck the three needles into it as she walked--some
before her feet, and some behind--and so managed to get across. When
she was on the other side, she hid the needles, in a place which she
had noticed particularly, and went on her way. Afterwards she came to
the sharp-cutting swords, but she set herself on her plough-wheel and
rolled safely over them. At last she came before a great lake, which
she had to sail across, and when she had done so she saw a great
castle. She went in and said she was a poor maiden, who wished very
much to hire herself out, if she might be taken in there as a servant.
For the frogs had told her that the king's son, whom she had released
out of the Iron Stove in the great wood, dwelt there; so she was
content to be taken as kitchen-maid, for very small pay.
Now the king's son had thought the princess was dead; and there was
now with him another maiden, whom he had been persuaded he ought to
marry, which grieved the poor kitchen-maid very much.
In the evening, when she had washed up the dishes, and had done all
her work, she felt in her pocket, and found the three nuts which the
old frog had given her. She bit one open, and was going to eat the
kernel, when, behold, inside it was the most beautiful dress
imaginable--so beautiful that the bride soon heard of it, came and
asked to see it, and wanted to buy it, saying it was no dress for a
kitchen-maid. But the kitchen-maid thought differently, and refused to
sell it, but offered to give it as a present, if the bride would grant
her one favour--namely, to sleep one night on the mat outside the
bridegroom's door. The bride gave her leave, because the dress was so
beautiful, and she had none like it.
Now when it was evening, she said to her bridegroom: "The foolish
kitchen-maid wants to sleep on the mat outside your door."
"If you are content, I am," said he.
But the bride gave him a glass of wine, in which she had put a
sleeping draught; so that he slept so soundly, nothing could wake him.
While, outside the door, the princess wept the whole night, saying: "I
have released you out of the wild wood--out of an Iron Stove; in
seeking you, I have gone over a glass mountain, over three sharp
swords, and over a great lake; yet, now that I find you, you will not
hear me."
Next evening, when she had washed up everything, she bit the second
nut open; and inside it was a far more beautiful dress than the first
which, when the bride saw, she wished to buy also. But the girl again
refused to take money and again begged that she might spend the night
outside the bridegroom's door. Once more, the bride gave him a
sleeping-draught, and he slept so soundly, that he could hear nothing.
But the kitchen-maid wept the whole night long, crying: "I have
released you out of a wild wood, and out of an Iron Stove; and have
gone over a glass mountain, over three sharp swords, and over a great
lake, before I found you; and yet, when I find you, you will not hear
The third evening, she bit open the third nut; and there was in it a
still more beautiful dress, which shone stiff with pure gold. When the
bride saw it, she wished more earnestly than ever to have it; but the
kitchen-maid would only give it to her on condition that she might
sleep, for the third time, on the mat at the bridegroom's door. But
this time the prince was cautious, and left the sleeping-draught
untouched. Now, when she began to weep, and to call out, "Dearest
treasure, I have released you out of the horrible wild wood, and out
of an Iron Stove," the king's son sprang up, crying out: "This is my
right true love--she is mine, and I am hers." Then he declared he
would not marry the other bride, whom he did not love; and so, still
in the middle of the night, he got into a carriage with the
kitchen-maid, and drove away.
When they came to the great lake, they sailed over; and at the three
sharp swords, they seated themselves on the plough-wheel; and at the
glass mountain, they found the three needles, and stuck them in step
by step. So they came at last to the little old house; but, as they
went in, lo! it changed to a great castle; the frogs turned to
princes and princesses, all kings' children, and received them both
with great joy. There the wedding was celebrated, and they remained in
the castle, which was much larger than that which belonged to the
princess's father. But as the old man lamented very much his
daughter's loss, and his own loneliness, they soon went and fetched
him home to themselves. So they had two kingdoms, instead of one, and
lived happily together all their days.
THE INVISIBLE PRINCE.
There was a king and queen who were dotingly fond of their only son,
notwithstanding that he was equally deformed in mind and person. The
king was quite sensible of the evil disposition of his son, but the
queen, in her excessive fondness, saw no fault whatever in her dear
Furibon, as he was named. The surest way to win her favour was to
praise Furibon for charms he did not possess. When he came of age to
have a governor, the king made choice of a prince who had an ancient
right to the crown, but was not able to support it. This prince had a
son, named Leander, handsome, accomplished, amiable--in every respect
the opposite of Prince Furibon. The two were frequently together,
which only made the deformed prince more repulsive.
One day, certain ambassadors having arrived from a far country, the
princes stood in a gallery to see them; when, taking Leander for the
king's son, they made their obeisance to him, treating Furibon as a
mere dwarf, at which the latter was so offended that he drew his
sword, and would have done them a mischief had not the king just then
appeared. As it was, the affair produced a quarrel, which ended in
Leander's being sent to a far-away castle belonging to his father.
There, however, he was quite happy, for he was a great lover of
hunting, fishing, and walking: he understood painting, read much, and
played upon several instruments; so that he was glad to be freed from
the fantastic humours of Furibon. One day as he was walking in the
garden, finding the heat increase, he retired into a shady grove, and
began to play upon the flute to amuse himself. As he played, he felt
something wind about his leg, and looking down saw a great adder: he
took his handkerchief, and catching it by the head, was going to kill
it. But the adder, looking steadfastly in his face, seemed to beg his
pardon. At this instant one of the gardeners happened to come to the
place where Leander was, and spying the snake, cried out to his
master, "Hold him fast, sir; it is but an hour since we ran after him
to kill him: it is the most mischievous creature in the world."
Leander, casting his eyes a second time upon the snake, which was
speckled with a thousand extraordinary colours, perceived the poor
creature still looked upon him with an aspect that seemed to implore
compassion, and never tried in the least to defend itself.
"Though thou hast such a mind to kill it," said he to the gardener,
"yet, as it came to me for refuge, I forbid thee to do it any harm;
for I will keep it, and when it has cast its beautiful skin I will let
it go." He then returned home, and carrying the snake with him, put it
into a large chamber, the key of which he kept himself, and ordered
bran, milk, and flowers to be given to it, for its delight and
sustenance; so that never was snake so happy. Leander went sometimes
to see it, and when it perceived him it made haste to meet him,
showing him all the little marks of love and gratitude of which a poor
snake was capable, which did not a little surprise him, though,
however, he took no further notice of it.
In the meantime all the court ladies were extremely troubled at his
absence, and he was the subject of all their discourse. "Alas!" cried
they, "there is no pleasure at court since Leander is gone, of whose
absence the wicked Furibon is the cause!" Furibon also had his
parasites, for his power over the queen made him feared; they told him
what the ladies said, which enraged him to such a degree that in his
passion he flew to the queen's chamber, and vowed he would kill
himself before her face if she did not find means to destroy Leander.
The queen, who also hated Leander, because he was handsomer than her
son, replied that she had long looked upon him as a traitor, and
therefore would willingly consent to his death. To which purpose she
advised Furibon to go a-hunting with some of his confidants, and
contrive it so that Leander should make one of the party.
"Then," said she, "you may find some way to punish him for pleasing
everybody."
Furibon understood her, and accordingly went a-hunting; and Leander,
when he heard the horns and the hounds, mounted his horse, and rode to
see who it was. But he was surprised to meet the prince so
unexpectedly: he alighted immediately, and saluted him with respect;
and Furibon received him more graciously than usual, and bade him
follow him. All of a sudden he turned his horse, and rode another way,
making a sign to the ruffians to take the first opportunity to kill
him; but before he had got quite out of sight, a lion of prodigious
size, coming out of his den, leaped upon Furibon: all his followers
fled, and only Leander remained; who, attacking the animal sword in
hand, by his valour and agility saved the life of his most cruel
enemy, who had fallen in a swoon from fear. When he recovered, Leander
presented him his horse to remount. Now, any other than such a wretch
would have been grateful: but Furibon did not even look upon him: nay,
mounting the horse, he rode in quest of the ruffians, to whom he
repeated his orders to kill him. They accordingly surrounded Leander,
who, setting his back to a tree, behaved with so much bravery, that he
laid them all dead at his feet. Furibon, believing him by this time
slain, rode eagerly up to the spot. When Leander saw him, he advanced
to meet him. "Sir," said he, "if it was by your order that these
assassins came to kill me, I am sorry I made any defence."
"You are an insolent villain!" replied Furibon, "and if ever you come
into my presence again, you shall surely die."
Leander made no answer, but retired sad and pensive to his own home,
where he spent the night in pondering what was best for him to do,
for there was no likelihood he should be able to defend himself
against the power of the king's son; therefore he at length concluded
he would travel abroad and see the world. Being ready to depart, he
recollected his snake, and, calling for some milk and fruits, carried
them to the poor creature for the last time; but on opening the door
he perceived an extraordinary lustre in one corner of the room, and
casting his eye on the place he was surprised to see a lady, whose
noble and majestic air made him immediately conclude she was a
princess of royal birth. Her habit was of purple satin, embroidered
with pearls and diamonds; and advancing towards him with a gracious
smile--
"Young prince," said she, "you find no longer your pet snake, but me,
the Fairy Gentilla, ready to requite your generosity. For know, that
we fairies live a hundred years in flourishing youth, without
diseases, without trouble or pain; and this term being expired, we
become snakes for eight days. During that time it is not in our power
to prevent any misfortune that may befall us; and if we happen to be
killed, we never revive again. But these eight days being expired, we
resume our usual form, and recover our beauty, our power, and our
riches. Now you know how much I am obliged to your goodness, and it is
but just that I should repay my debt of gratitude: think how I can
serve you and depend on me."
The young prince, who had never conversed with a fairy till now, was
so surprised that it was a long time before he could speak. But at
length, making a profound reverence, "Madam," said he, "since I have
had the honour to serve you, I know not any other happiness that I can
wish for."
"I should be sorry," replied she, "not to be of service to you in
something; consider, it is in my power to bestow on you long life,
kingdoms, riches: to give you mines of diamonds, and houses full of
gold; I can make you an excellent orator, poet, musician, and painter;
or, if you desire it, a spirit of the air, the water, or the earth."
Here Leander interrupted her: "Permit me, madam," said he, "to ask you
what benefit it would be to me to be a spirit?"
"Much," replied the fairy; "you would be invisible when you pleased,
and might in an instant traverse the whole earth; you would be able to
fly without wings, to descend into the abyss of the earth without
dying, and walk at the bottom of the sea without being drowned; nor
doors, nor windows, though fast shut and locked, could hinder you from
entering anywhere; and whenever you had a mind, you might resume your
natural form."
"Oh, madam!" cried Leander, "then let me be a spirit; I am going to
travel, and should prefer it above all those other advantages you have
so generously offered me."
Gentilla thereupon stroking his face three times, "Be a spirit," said
she; and then, embracing him, she gave him a little red cap with a
plume of feathers. "When you put on this cap, you shall be invisible;
but when you take it off, you shall again become visible."
Leander, overjoyed, put his little red cap upon his head, and wished
himself in the forest, that he might gather some wild roses which he
had observed there: his body immediately became as light as thought;
he flew through the window like a bird; though, in flying over the
river, he was not without fear, lest he should fall into it, and the
power of the fairy not be able to save him. But he arrived in safety
at the rose-bushes, plucked three roses, and returned immediately to
his chamber; presented his roses to the fairy, overjoyed that his
first experiment had succeeded so well. She bade him keep the roses,
for that one of them would supply him with money whenever he wanted
it; that if he put the other into his mistress's bosom, he would know
whether she was faithful or not; and that the third would keep him
always in good health. Then, without staying to receive his thanks,
she wished him success in his travels and disappeared.
Leander, infinitely pleased, settled his affairs, mounted the finest
horse in the stable, called Gris-de-line, and attended by some of his
servants in livery, made his return to court. Now you must know
Furibon had given out, that had it not been for his courage Leander
would have murdered him when they were a-hunting; so the king, being
importuned by the queen, gave orders that Leander should be
apprehended. But when he came, he showed so much courage and
resolution that Furibon ran to the queen's chamber, and prayed her to
order him to be seized. The queen, who was extremely diligent in
everything that her son desired, went immediately to the king.
Furibon, being impatient to know what would be resolved, followed her;
but stopped at the door, and laid his ear to the keyhole, putting his
hair aside that he might the better hear what was said. At the same
time, Leander entered the court-hall of the palace with his red cap
upon his head, and perceiving Furibon listening at the door of the
king's chamber, he took a nail and a hammer, and nailed his ear to the
door. Furibon began to roar, so that the queen, hearing her son's
voice, ran and opened the door, and, pulling it hastily, tore her
son's ear from his head. Half out of her wits, she set him in her lap,
took up his ear, kissed it, and clapped it again upon its place; but
the invisible Leander, seizing upon a handful of twigs, with which
they corrected the king's little dogs, gave the queen several lashes
upon her hands, and her son as many on the nose: upon which the queen
cried out, "Murder! murder!" and the king looked about, and the people
came running in; but nothing was to be seen. Some cried that the queen
was mad, and that her madness proceeded from her grief to see that her
son had lost one ear; and the king was as ready as any to believe it,
so that when she came near him he avoided her, which made a very
ridiculous scene. Leander, then leaving the chamber, went into the
garden, and there, assuming his own shape, he boldly began to pluck
the queen's cherries, apricots, strawberries, and flowers, though he
knew she set such a high value on them, that it was as much as a man's
life was worth to touch one. The gardeners, all amazed, came and told
their majesties that Prince Leander was making havoc of all the fruits
and flowers in the queen's garden.
"What insolence!" said the queen: then turning to Furibon, "My pretty
child, forget the pain of thy ear but for a moment, and fetch that
vile wretch hither; take our guards, both horse and foot, seize him,
and punish him as he deserves."
Furibon, encouraged by his mother, and attended by a great number of
armed soldiers, entered the garden, and saw Leander; who, taking
refuge under a tree, pelted them all with oranges. But when they came
running towards him, thinking to have seized him, he was not to be
seen; he had slipped behind Furibon, who was in a bad condition
already. But Leander played him one trick more; for he pushed him down
upon the gravel-walk, and frightened him so that the soldiers had to
take him up, carry him away, and put him to bed.
Satisfied with this revenge, he returned to his servants, who waited
for him, and giving them money, sent them back to his castle, that
none might know the secret of his red cap and roses. As yet he had not
determined whither to go; however, he mounted his fine horse
Gris-de-line, and, laying the reins upon his neck, let him take his
own road: at length he arrived in a forest, where he stopped to
shelter himself from the heat. He had not been above a minute there
before he heard a lamentable noise of sighing and sobbing; and looking
about him, beheld a man, who ran, stopped, then ran again, sometimes
crying, sometimes silent, then tearing his hair, then thumping his
breast like some unfortunate madman. Yet he seemed to be both handsome
and young: his garments had been magnificent, but he had torn them all
to tatters. The prince, moved with compassion, made towards him, and
mildly accosted him: "Sir," said he, "your condition appears so
deplorable, that I must ask the cause of your sorrow, assuring you of
every assistance in my power."
"Oh, sir," answered the young man, "nothing can cure my grief; this
day my dear mistress is to be sacrificed to a rich old ruffian of a
husband who will make her miserable."
"Does she love you then?" asked Leander.
"I flatter myself so," answered the young man.
"Where is she?" continued Leander.
"In a castle at the end of this forest," replied the lover.
"Very well," said Leander; "stay you here till I come again, and in a
little while I will bring you good news."
He then put on his little red cap, and wished himself in the castle.
He had hardly got thither before he heard all sorts of music; he
entered into a great room, where the friends and kindred of the old
man and the young lady were assembled. No one could look more amiable
than she; but the paleness of her complexion, the melancholy that
appeared in her countenance, and the tears that now and then dropped,
as it were by stealth, from her eyes, betrayed the trouble of her
mind.
Leander now became invisible, and placed himself in a corner of the
room. He soon perceived the father and mother of the bride; and coming
behind the mother's chair, whispered in her ear, "If you marry your
daughter to that old dotard, before eight days are over you shall
certainly die." The woman, frightened to hear such a terrible sentence
pronounced upon her, and yet not know from whence it came, gave a loud
shriek, and dropped upon the floor. Her husband asked what ailed her:
she cried that she was a dead woman if the marriage of her daughter
went forward, and therefore she would not consent to it for all the
world. Her husband laughed at her, and called her a fool. But the
invisible Leander accosting the man, threatened him in the same way,
which frightened him so terribly, that he also insisted on the
marriage being broken off. When the lover complained, Leander trod
hard upon his gouty toes, and rang such an alarum in his ears, that,
not being able any longer to hear himself speak, away he limped, glad
enough to go. The real lover soon appeared, and he and his fair
mistress fell joyfully into one another's arms, the parents consenting
to their union. Leander, assuming his own shape, appeared at the
hall-door, as if he were a stranger drawn thither by the report of
this extraordinary wedding.
From hence he travelled on, and came to a great city, where, upon his
arrival, he understood there was a great and solemn procession, in
order to shut up a young woman, against her will, among the vestal
nuns. The prince was touched with compassion; and thinking the best
use he could make of his cap was to redress public wrongs and relieve
the oppressed, he flew to the temple, where he saw the young woman,
crowned with flowers, clad in white, and with her dishevelled hair
flowing about her shoulders. Two of her brothers led her by each hand,
and her mother followed her with a great crowd of men and women.
Leander, being invisible, cried out, "Stop, stop, wicked brethren:
stop, rash and inconsiderate mother; if you proceed any further, you
shall be squeezed to death like so many frogs." They looked about, but
could not conceive from whence these terrible menaces came. The
brothers said it was only their sister's lover, who had hid himself in
some hole; at which Leander, in wrath, took a long cudgel, and they
had no reason to say the blows were not well laid on. The multitude
fled, the vestals ran away, and Leander was left alone with the
victim; immediately he pulled off his red cap, and asked her wherein
he might serve her. She answered him, that there was a certain
gentleman whom she would be glad to marry, but that he wanted an
estate. Leander then shook his rose so long, that he supplied them
with ten millions; after which they married, and lived happily
But his last adventure was the most agreeable. Entering into a wide
forest, he heard lamentable cries. Looking about him every way, at
length he spied four men well armed, who were carrying away by force a
young lady, thirteen or fourteen years of age; upon which, making up
to them as fast as he could, "What harm has that girl done?" said he.
"Ha, ha! my little master," cried he who seemed to be the ringleader
of the rest, "who bade you inquire?"
"Let her alone," said Leander, "and go about your business."
"Oh yes, to be sure," cried they, laughing; whereupon the prince
alighting, put on his red cap, not thinking it otherwise prudent to
attack four who seemed strong enough to fight a dozen. One of them
stayed to take care of the young lady, while the three others went
after Gris-de-line, who gave them a great deal of unwelcome exercise.
Meantime the young lady continued her cries and complaints: "Oh my
dear princess," said she, "how happy was I in your palace! Did you but
know my sad misfortune, you would send your Amazons to rescue poor
Abricotina."
Leander, having listened to what she said, without delay seized the
ruffian that held her, and bound him fast to a tree, before he had
time or strength to defend himself. He then went to the second, and
taking him by both arms, bound him in the same manner to another
tree. In the meantime Abricotina made the best of her good fortune,
and betook herself to her heels, not knowing which way she went. But
Leander, missing her, called out to his horse Gris-de-line; who, by
two kicks with his hoof, rid himself of the two ruffians who had
pursued him: one of them had his head broken; and the other, three of
his ribs. And now Leander only wanted to overtake Abricotina; for he
had thought her so handsome that he wished to see her again. He found
her leaning against a tree. When she saw Gris-de-line coming towards
her, "How lucky am I!" cried she; "this pretty little horse will carry
me to the Palace of Pleasure." Leander heard her, though she saw him
not: he rode up to her; Gris-de-line stopped, and when Abricotina
mounted him, Leander clasped her in his arms, and placed her gently
before him. Oh, how great was Abricotina's fear to feel herself fast
embraced, and yet see nobody! She durst not stir, and shut her eyes
for fear of seeing a spirit. But Leander took off his little cap: "How
comes it, fair Abricotina," said he, "that you are afraid of me, who
delivered you out of the hands of the ruffians?"
With that she opened her eyes, and knowing him again, "Oh sir," said
she, "I am infinitely obliged to you; but I was afraid, for I felt
myself held fast, and could see no one."
"Surely," replied Leander, "the danger you have been in has disturbed
you, and cast a mist before your eyes."
Abricotina would not seem to doubt him, though she was otherwise
extremely sensible. And after they had talked for some time of
indifferent things, Leander requested her to tell him her age, her
country, and by what accident she fell into the hands of the ruffians.
"Know then, sir," said she, "there was a certain very great fairy
married to a prince who wearied of her; she therefore banished him
from her presence, and established herself and daughter in the Island
of Calm Delights. The princess, who is my mistress, being very fair,
has many lovers--among others, one named Furibon, whom she detests: he
it was whose ruffians seized me to-day when I was wandering in search
of a stray parrot. Accept, noble prince, my best thanks for your
valour, which I shall never forget."
Leander said how happy he was to have served her, and asked if he
could not obtain admission into the island. Abricotina assured him
this was impossible, and therefore he had better forget all about it.
While they were thus conversing, they came to the bank of a large
river: Abricotina alighting with a nimble jump from the horse--
"Farewell, sir," said she to the prince, making a profound reverence,
"I wish you every happiness."
"And I," said Leander, "wish that I may now and then have a small
share in your remembrance."
So saying, he galloped away, and soon entered into the thickest part
of a wood, near a river where he unbridled and unsaddled Gris-de-line;
then, putting on his little cap, wished himself in the Island of Calm
Delights, and his wish was immediately accomplished.
The palace was of pure gold, and stood upon pillars of crystal and
precious stones, which represented the zodiac, and all the wonders of
nature; all the arts and sciences; the sea, with all the variety of
fish therein contained; the earth, with all the various creatures
which it produces; the chases of Diana and her nymphs; the noble
exercises of the Amazons; the amusements of a country life; flocks of
sheep with their shepherds and dogs; the toils of agriculture,
harvesting, gardening. And among all this variety of representations,
there was neither man nor boy to be seen--not so much as a little
winged Cupid: so highly had the princess been incensed against her
inconstant husband, as not to show the least favour to his fickle sex.
"Abricotina did not deceive me," said Leander to himself; "they have
banished from hence the very idea of men; now let us see what they
have lost by it." With that he entered into the palace, and at every
step he took, he met with objects so wonderful, that when he had once
fixed his eyes upon them he had much ado to take them off again. He
viewed a vast number of these apartments, some full of china, no less
fine than curious; others lined with porcelain, so delicate, that the
walls were quite transparent. Coral jasper, agates, and cornelians
adorned the rooms of state, and the presence-chamber was one entire
mirror. The throne was one single pearl, hollowed like a shell; the
princess sat, surrounded by her maidens, none of whom could compare
with herself. In her was all the innocent sweetness of youth, joined
to the dignity of maturity; in truth, she was perfection; and so
thought the invisible Leander.
Not seeing Abricotina, she asked where she was. Upon that, Leander,
being very desirous to speak, assumed the tone of a parrot, for there
were many in the room; and addressing himself invisibly to the
princess,--
"Most charming princess," said he, "Abricotina will return
immediately. She was in great danger of being carried away from this
palace, but for a young prince who rescued her."
The princess was surprised at the parrot, his answer was so extremely
pertinent:
"You are very rude, little parrot," said the princess; "and
Abricotina, when she comes, shall chastise you for it."
"I shall not be chastised," answered Leander, still counterfeiting the
parrot's voice; "moreover, she will let you know the great desire that
stranger had to be admitted into this palace, that he might convince
you of the falsehood of those ideas which you have conceived against
his sex."
"In truth, pretty parrot," cried the princess, "it is a pity you are
not every day so diverting I should love you dearly."
"Ah! if prattling will please you, princess," replied Leander, "I
will prate from morning till night."
"But," continued the princess, "how shall I be sure my parrot is not a
sorcerer?"
"He is more in love than any sorcerer can be," replied the prince.
At this moment Abricotina entered the room, and falling at her lovely
mistress's feet, gave her a full account of what had befallen her, and
described the prince in the most glowing colours.
"I should have hated all men," added she, "had I not seen him! Oh,
madam, how charming he is! His air and all his behaviour have
something in them so noble; and though whatever he spoke was
infinitely pleasing, yet I think I did well in not bringing him
hither."
To this the princess said nothing, but she asked Abricotina a hundred
other questions concerning the prince; whether she knew his name, his
country, his birth, from whence he came, and whither he was going; and
after this she fell into a profound thoughtfulness.
Leander observed everything, and continued to chatter as he had
begun--
"Abricotina is ungrateful, madam," said he; "that poor stranger will
die for grief if he sees you not."
"Well, parrot, let him die," answered the princess, with a sigh; "and
since thou undertakest to reason like a person of wit, and not like a
little bird, I forbid thee to talk to me any more of this unknown
person."
Leander was overjoyed to find that Abricotina's and the parrot's
discourse had made such an impression on the princess. He looked upon
her with pleasure and delight. "Can it be," said he to himself, "that
the masterpiece of nature, that the wonder of our age, should be
confined eternally in an island, and no mortal dare to approach her?
But," continued he, "wherefore am I concerned that others are banished
hence, since I have the happiness to be with her, to see her, to hear
and to admire her; nay more, to love her above all the women in the
universe?"
It was late, and the princess retired into a large room of marble and
porphyry, where several bubbling fountains refreshed the air with an
agreeable coolness. As soon as she entered, the music began, a
sumptuous supper was served up, and the birds from several aviaries on
each side of the room, of which Abricotina had the chief care, opened
their little throats in the most agreeable manner.
Leander had travelled a journey long enough to give him a good
appetite, which made him draw near the table, where the very smell of
such viands was agreeable and refreshing. The princess had a curious
tabby-cat, for which she had a great kindness. This cat one of the
maids of honour held in her arms, saying, "Madam, Bluet is hungry!"
With that a chair was presently brought for the cat; for he was a cat
of quality, and had a necklace of pearl about his neck. He was served
on a gold plate, with a laced napkin before him; and the plate being
supplied with meat, Bluet sat with the solemn importance of an
alderman.
"Ho, ho!" cried Leander to himself; "an idle tabby malkin, that
perhaps never caught a mouse in his life, and I dare say is not
descended from a better family than myself, has the honour to sit at
table with my mistress: I would fain know whether he loves her so well
as I do."
Saying this, he placed himself in the chair with the cat upon his
knee, for nobody saw him, because he had his little red cap on;
finding Bluet's plate well supplied with partridge, quails, and
pheasants, he made so free with them, that whatever was set before
master puss disappeared in a trice. The whole court said no cat ever
ate with a better appetite. There were excellent ragouts, and the
prince made use of the cat's paw to taste them; but he sometimes
pulled his paw too roughly, and Bluet, not understanding raillery,
began to mew and be quite out of patience. The princess observing it,
"Bring that fricassee and that tart to poor Bluet," said she; "see how
he cries to have them."
Leander laughed to himself at the pleasantness of this adventure; but
he was very thirsty, not being accustomed to make such large meals
without drinking. By the help of the cat's paw, he got a melon, with
which he somewhat quenched his thirst; and when supper was quite over,
he went to the beaufet, and took two bottles of delicious wine.
The princess now retired into her boudoir, ordering Abricotina to
follow her and make fast the door; but they could not keep out
Leander, who was there as soon as they. However, the princess,
believing herself alone with her confidante--
"Abricotina," said she, "tell me truly, did you exaggerate in your
description of the unknown prince, for methinks it is impossible he
should be as amiable as you say?"
"Madam," replied the damsel, "if I have failed in anything, it was in
coming short of what was due to him."
The princess sighed, and was silent for a time; then resuming her
speech: "I am glad," said she, "thou didst not bring him with thee."
"But, madam," answered Abricotina, who was a cunning girl, and already
penetrated her mistress's thoughts, "suppose he had come to admire the
wonders of these beautiful mansions, what harm could he have done us?
Will you live eternally unknown in a corner of the world, concealed
from the rest of human kind? Of what use is all your grandeur, pomp,
magnificence, if nobody sees it?"
"Hold thy peace, prattler," replied the princess, "and do not disturb
that happy repose which I have enjoyed so long."
Abricotina durst make no reply; and the princess, having waited her
answer for some time, asked her whether she had anything to say.
Abricotina then said she thought it was to very little purpose her
mistress having sent her picture to the courts of several princes,
where it only served to make those who saw it miserable; that every
one would be desirous to marry her, and as she could not marry them
all, indeed none of them, it would make them desperate.
"Yet, for all that," said the princess, "I could wish my picture were
in the hands of this same stranger."
"Oh, madam," answered Abricotina, "is not his desire to see you
violent enough already; would you augment it?"
"Yes," cried the princess; "a certain impulse of vanity, which I was
never sensible of till now, has bred this foolish fancy in me."
Leander heard all this discourse, and lost not a tittle of what she
said; some of her expressions gave him hope, others absolutely
destroyed it. The princess presently asked Abricotina whether she had
seen anything extraordinary during her short travels?
"Madam," said she, "I passed through one forest where I saw certain
creatures that resembled little children: they skip and dance upon the
trees like squirrels; they are very ugly, but have wonderful agility
and address."
"I wish I had one of them," said the princess; "but if they are so
nimble as you say they are, it is impossible to catch one."
Leander, who passed through the same forest, knew what Abricotina
meant, and presently wished himself in the place. He caught a dozen of
little monkeys, some bigger, some less, and all of different colours,
and with much ado put them into a large sack; then, wishing himself at
Paris, where, he had heard, a man might have everything for money, he
went and bought a little gold chariot. He taught six green monkeys to
draw it; they were harnessed with fine traces of flame-coloured
morocco leather. He went to another place, where he met with two
monkeys of merit, the most pleasant of which was called Briscambril,
the other Pierceforest--both very spruce and well educated. He dressed
Briscambril like a king, and placed him in the coach; Pierceforest he
made the coachman; the others were dressed like pages; all which he
put into his sack, coach and all.
The princess not being gone to bed, heard a rumbling of a little coach
in the long gallery; at the same time, her ladies came to tell her
that the king of the dwarfs was arrived, and the chariot immediately
entered her chamber with all the monkey train. The country monkeys
began to show a thousand tricks, which far surpassed those of
Briscambril and Pierceforest. To say the truth, Leander conducted the
whole machine. He drew the chariot where Briscambril sat arrayed as a
king, and making him hold a box of diamonds in his hand, he presented
it with a becoming grace to the princess. The princess's surprise may
be easily imagined. Moreover, Briscambril made a sign for Pierceforest
to come and dance with him. The most celebrated dancers were not to be
compared with them in activity. But the princess, troubled that she
could not guess from whence this curious present came, dismissed the
dancers sooner than she would otherwise have done, though she was
extremely pleased with them.
Leander, satisfied with having seen the delight the princess had taken
in beholding the monkeys, thought of nothing now but to get a little
repose, which he greatly wanted. He stayed some time in the great
gallery; afterwards, going down a pair of stairs, and finding a door
open, he entered into an apartment the most delightful that ever was
seen. There was in it a bed of cloth of gold, enriched with pearls,
intermixed with rubies and emeralds; for by this time there appeared
daylight sufficient for him to view and admire the magnificence of
this sumptuous furniture. Having made fast the door, he composed
himself to sleep. Next day he rose very early, and looking about on
every side, he spied a painter's pallet, with colours ready prepared
and pencils. Remembering what the princess had said to Abricotina
touching her own portrait, he immediately (for he could paint as well
as the most excellent masters) seated himself before a mirror, and
drew his own picture first; then, in an oval, that of the princess. He
had all her features so strong in his imagination, that he had no
occasion for her sitting; and as his desire to please her had set him
to work, never did portrait bear a stronger resemblance. He had
painted himself upon one knee, holding the princess's picture in one
hand, and in the other a label with this inscription--"She is better
in my heart." When the princess went into her cabinet, she was amazed
to see the portrait of a man; and she fixed her eyes upon it with so
much the more surprise, because she also saw her own with it, and
because the words which were written upon the label afforded her ample
room for curiosity She persuaded herself that it was Abricotina's
doing; and all she desired to know was, whether the portrait were real
or imaginary. Rising in haste, she called Abricotina, while the
invisible Leander, with his little red cap, slipped into the cabinet,
impatient to know what passed. The princess bid Abricotina look upon
the picture, and tell her what she thought of it.
After she had viewed it, "I protest," said she, "'tis the picture of
that generous stranger to whom I am indebted for my life. Yes, yes, I
am sure it is he; his very features, shape, and hair."
"Thou pretendest surprise," said the princess, "but I know it was thou
thyself who put it there."
"Who! I, madam?" replied Abricotina; "I protest, I never saw the
picture before in my life. Should I be so bold as to conceal from your
knowledge a thing that so nearly concerns you? And by what miracle
could I come by it? I never could paint, nor did any man ever enter
this place; yet here he is painted with you."
"Some spirit, then, must have brought it hither," cried the princess.
"How I tremble for fear, madam!" said Abricotina. "Was it not rather
some lover? And therefore, if you will take my advice, let us burn it
immediately."
"'Twere a pity to burn it," cried the princess, sighing; "a finer
piece, methinks, cannot adorn my cabinet." And saying these words, she
cast her eyes upon it. But Abricotina continued obstinate in her
opinion that it ought to be burnt, as a thing that could not come
there but by the power of magic.
"And these words--'She is better in my heart,'" said the princess;
"must we burn them too?"
"No favour must be shown to anything," said Abricotina, "not even to
your own portrait."
Abricotina ran away immediately for some fire, while the princess went
to look out at the window. Leander, unwilling to let his performance
be burnt, took this opportunity to convey it away without being
perceived. He had hardly quitted the cabinet, when the princess turned
about to look once more upon that enchanting picture, which had so
delighted her. But how was she surprised to find it gone! She sought
for it all the room over; and Abricotina returning, was no less
surprised than her mistress; so that this last adventure put them both
in the most terrible fright.
Leander took great delight in hearing and seeing his incomparable
mistress; even though he had to eat every day at her table with the
tabby-cat, who fared never the worse for that; but his satisfaction
was far from being complete, seeing he durst neither speak nor show
himself; and he knew it was not a common thing for ladies to fall in
love with persons invisible.
The princess had a universal taste for amusement. One day, she was
saying to her attendants that it would give her great pleasure to know
how the ladies were dressed in all the courts of the universe. There
needed no more words to send Leander all over the world. He wished
himself in China, where he bought the richest stuffs he could lay his
hands on, and got patterns of all the court fashions. From thence he
flew to Siam, where he did the same; in three days he travelled over
all the four parts of the world, and, from time to time, brought what
he bought to the Palace of Calm Delights, and hid it all in a chamber,
which he kept always locked. When he had thus collected together all
the rarities he could meet with--for he never wanted money, his rose
always supplying him--he went and bought five or six dozen of dolls,
which he caused to be dressed at Paris, the place in the world where
most regard is paid to fashions. They were all dressed differently,
and as magnificent as could be, and Leander placed them all in the
princess's closet. When she entered it, she was agreeably surprised to
see such a company of little mutes, every one decked with watches,
bracelets, diamond buckles, or necklaces; and the most remarkable of
them held a picture-box in its hand, which the princess opening, found
it contained Leander's portrait. She gave a loud shriek, and looking
upon Abricotina, "There have appeared of late," said she, "so many
wonders in this place, that I know not what to think of them:--my
birds are all grown witty; I cannot so much as wish, but presently I
have my desires; twice have I now seen the portrait of him who rescued
thee from the ruffians; and here are silks of all sorts, diamonds,
embroideries, laces, and an infinite number of other rarities. What
fairy is it that takes such care to pay me these agreeable
civilities?"
Leander was overjoyed to hear and see her so much interested about his
picture, and calling to mind that there was in a grotto which she
often frequented a certain pedestal, on which a Diana, not yet
finished, was to be erected, on this pedestal he resolved to place
himself, crowned with laurel, and holding a lyre in his hand, on which
he played like another Apollo. He most anxiously waited the princess's
retiring to the grotto, which she did every day since her thoughts had
been taken up with this unknown person; for what Abricotina had said,
joined to the sight of the picture, had almost destroyed her repose:
her lively humour changed into a pensive melancholy, and she grew a
great lover of solitude. When she entered the grotto, she made a sign
that nobody should follow her, so that her young damsels dispersed
themselves into the neighbouring walks. The princess threw herself
upon a bank of green turf, sighed, wept, and even talked, but so
softly that Leander could not hear what she said. He had put his red
cap on, that she might not see him at first; but having taken it off,
she beheld him standing on the pedestal. At first she took him for a
real statue, for he observed exactly the attitude in which he had
placed himself, without moving so much as a finger. She beheld with a
kind of pleasure intermixed with fear, but pleasure soon dispelled her
fear, and she continued to view the pleasing figure, which so exactly
resembled life. The prince having tuned his lyre, began to play, at
which the princess, greatly surprised, could not resist the fear that
seized her; she grew pale, and fell into a swoon. Leander leaped from
the pedestal, and putting on his little red cap, that he might not be
perceived, took the princess in his arms, and gave her all the
assistance that his zeal and tenderness could inspire. At length she
opened her charming eyes, and looked about in search of him, but she
could perceive nobody; yet she felt somebody who held her hands,
kissed them, and bedewed them with his tears. It was a long time
before she durst speak, and her spirits were in a confused agitation
between fear and hope. She was afraid of the spirit, but loved the
figure of the unknown. At length she said: "Courtly invisible, why are
you not the person I desire you should be?" At these words, Leander
was going to declare himself, but durst not do it yet; "For," thought
he, "if I again affright the object I adore, and make her fear me, she
will not love me." This consideration caused him to keep silence.
The princess, then, believing herself alone, called Abricotina and
told her all the wonders of the animated statue; that it had played
divinely, and that the invisible person had greatly assisted her when
she lay in a swoon.
"What pity 'tis," said she, "that this person should be so frightful,
for nothing can be more amiable or acceptable than his behaviour!"
"Who told you, madam," answered Abricotina, "that he is frightful? If
he is the youth who saved me, he is beautiful as Cupid himself."
"If Cupid and the unknown are the same," replied the princess,
blushing, "I could be content to love Cupid; but alas! how far am I
from such a happiness! I love a mere shadow; and this fatal picture,
joined to what thou hast told me, have inspired me with inclinations
so contrary to the precepts which I received from my mother, that I am
daily afraid of being punished for them."
"Oh! madam," said Abricotina, interrupting her, "have you not troubles
enough already? Why should you anticipate afflictions which may never
come to pass?"
It is easy to imagine what pleasure Leander took in this conversation.
In the meantime, the little Furibon, still enamoured of the princess
whom he had never seen, expected with impatience the return of the
four servants whom he had sent to the Island of Calm Delights. One of
them at last came back, and after he had given the prince a particular
account of what had passed, told him that the island was defended by
Amazons, and that unless he sent a very powerful army, it would be
impossible to get into it. The king his father was dead, and Furibon
was now lord of all: disdaining, therefore, any repulse, he raised an
army of four hundred thousand men, and put himself at the head of
them, appearing like another Tom Thumb upon a war-horse. Now, when the
Amazons perceived his mighty host, they gave the princess notice of
it, who immediately despatched away her trusty Abricotina to the
kingdom of the fairies, to beg her mother's instructions as to what
she should do to drive the little Furibon from her territories. But
Abricotina found the fairy in an angry humour.
"Nothing that my daughter does," said she, "escapes my knowledge. The
Prince Leander is now in her palace; he loves her, and she has a
tenderness for him. All my cares and precepts have not been able to
guard her from the tyranny of love, and she is now under its fatal
dominion. But it is the decree of destiny, and I must submit;
therefore, Abricotina, begone! nor let me hear a word more of a
daughter whose behaviour has so much displeased me."
Abricotina returned with these ill tidings, whereat the princess was
almost distracted; and this was soon perceived by Leander, who was
near her, though she did not see him. He beheld her grief with the
greatest pain. However, he durst not then open his lips; but
recollecting that Furibon was exceedingly covetous, he thought that,
by giving him a sum of money, he might perhaps prevail with him to
retire. Thereupon, he dressed himself like an Amazon, and wished
himself in the forest, to catch his horse. He had no sooner called him
than Gris-de-line came leaping, prancing, and neighing for joy, for he
was grown quite weary of being so long absent from his dear master;
but when he beheld him dressed as a woman he hardly knew him. However,
at the sound of his voice, he suffered the prince to mount, and they
soon arrived in the camp of Furibon, where they gave notice that a
lady was come to speak with him from the Princess of Calm Delights.
Immediately the little fellow put on his royal robes, and having
placed himself upon his throne, he looked like a great toad
counterfeiting a king.
Leander harangued him, and told him that the princess, preferring a
quiet and peaceable life to the fatigues of war, had sent to offer his
majesty as much money as he pleased to demand, provided he would
suffer her to continue in peace; but if he refused her proposal, she
would omit no means that might serve for her defence. Furibon replied
that he took pity on her, and would grant her the honour of his
protection; but that he demanded a hundred thousand thousand millions
of pounds, and without which he would not return to his kingdom.
Leander answered that such a vast sum would be too long a-counting,
and therefore, if he would say how many rooms full he desired to have,
the princess was generous and rich enough to satisfy him. Furibon was
astonished to hear that, instead of entreating, she would rather offer
more; and it came into his wicked mind to take all the money he could
get, and then seize the Amazon and kill her, that she might never
return to her mistress. He told Leander, therefore, that he would have
thirty chambers of gold, all full to the ceiling. Leander, being
conducted into the chambers, took his rose and shook it, till every
room was filled with all sorts of coin. Furibon was in an ecstasy, and
the more gold he saw the greater was his desire to get hold of the
Amazon; so that when all the rooms were full, he commanded his guards
to seize her, alleging she had brought him counterfeit money.
Immediately Leander put on his little red cap and disappeared. The
guards, believing that the lady had escaped, ran out and left Furibon
alone; when Leander, availing himself of the opportunity, took the
tyrant by the hair, and twisted his head off with the same ease he
would a pullet's; nor did the little wretch of a king see the hand
that killed him.
Leander having got his enemy's head, wished himself in the Palace of
Calm Delights, where he found the princess walking, and with grief
considering the message which her mother had sent her, and on the
means to repel Furibon. Suddenly she beheld a head hanging in the air,
with nobody to hold it. This prodigy astonished her so, that she could
not tell what to think of it; but her amazement was increased when she
saw the head laid at her feet, and heard a voice utter these words:
    "Charming princess, cease your fear
    Of Furibon; whose head see here."
Abricotina, knowing Leander's voice, cried: "I protest, madam, the
invisible person who speaks is the very stranger that rescued me."
The princess seemed astonished, but yet pleased.
"Oh," said she, "if it be true that the invisible and the stranger are
the same person, I confess I shall be glad to make him my
acknowledgments."
Leander, still invisible, replied, "I will yet do more to deserve
them;" and so saying he returned to Furibon's army, where the report
of the king's death was already spread throughout the camp. As soon
as Leander appeared there in his usual habit, everybody knew him; all
the officers and soldiers surrounded him, uttering the loudest
acclamations of joy. In short, they acknowledged him for their king,
and that the crown of right belonged to him, for which he thanked
them, and, as the first mark of his royal bounty, divided the thirty
rooms of gold among the soldiers. This done, he returned to his
princess, ordering the army to march back into his kingdom.
The princess was gone to bed. Leander, therefore, retired into his own
apartment, for he was very sleepy--so sleepy that he forgot to bolt
his door; and so it happened that the princess, rising early to taste
the morning air, chanced to enter into this very chamber, and was
greatly astonished to find a young prince asleep upon the bed. She
took a full view of him, and was convinced that he was the person
whose picture she had in her diamond box. "It is impossible," said
she, "that this should be a spirit; for can spirits sleep? Is this a
body composed of air and fire, without substance, as Abricotina told
me?" She softly touched his hair, and heard him breathe and looked at
him as if she could have looked for ever. While she was thus occupied,
her mother, the fairy, entered with such a dreadful noise that Leander
started out of his sleep. But how deeply was he afflicted, to behold
his beloved princess in the most deplorable condition! Her mother
dragged her by the hair, and loaded her with a thousand bitter
reproaches. In what grief and consternation were the two young lovers,
who saw themselves now upon the point of being separated for ever! The
princess durst not open her lips, but cast her eyes upon Leander, as
if to beg his assistance. He judged rightly, that he ought not to deal
rudely with a power superior to his own, and therefore he sought, by
his eloquence and submission, to move the incensed fairy. He ran to
her, threw himself at her feet, and besought her to have pity upon a
young prince, who would never change in his affection for her
daughter. The princess, encouraged, also embraced her mother's knees,
and declared that without Leander she should never be happy.
"Happy!" cried the fairy, "you know not the miseries of love, nor the
treacheries of which lovers are capable. They bewitch us only to
poison our lives; I have known it by experience; and will you suffer
the same?"
"Is there no exception, madam?" replied Leander, and his countenance
showed him to be one.
But neither tears nor entreaties could move the implacable fairy; and
it is very probable that she would never have pardoned them, had not
the lovely Gentilla appeared at that instant in the chamber, more
brilliant than the sun. Embracing the old fairy,--
"Dear sister," said she, "I am persuaded you cannot have forgotten the
good office I did you when, after your unhappy marriage, you besought
a readmittance into Fairyland; since then I never desired any favour
at your hands, but now the time is come. Pardon, then, this lovely
princess; consent to her nuptials with this young prince. I will
engage he shall be ever constant to her; the thread of their days
shall be spun of gold and silk; they shall live to complete your
happiness; and I will never forget the obligation you lay upon me."
"Charming Gentilla," cried the fairy, "I consent to whatever you
desire. Come, my dear children, and receive my love." So saying, she
embraced them both.
Abricotina, just then entering, cast her eyes upon Leander: she knew
him again, and saw he was perfectly happy, at which she, too, was
quite satisfied.
"Prince," condescendingly said the fairy-mother, "I will remove the
Island of Calm Delights into your own kingdom, live with you myself,
and do you great services."
Whether or not Prince Leander appreciated this offer, he bowed low,
and assured his mother-in-law that no favour could be equal to the one
he had that day received from her hands. This short compliment pleased
the fairy exceedingly, for she belonged to those ancient days when
people used to stand a whole day upon one leg complimenting one
another. The nuptials were performed in a most splendid manner, and
the young prince and princess lived together happily for many years,
beloved by all around them.
THE WOODCUTTER'S DAUGHTER.
There was once a poor woodcutter, very miserable, though prudent and
industrious; he had a wife and three grown-up sons, yet their united
labours scarcely sufficed for bread. No hope appeared of improving his
lot, when he was one day fortunate enough to save the life of his
master when attacked by robbers in the forest.
This master was not ungrateful; he desired the woodcutter to repair to
him on the following day in order to receive a reward. The poor man
did not fail, hoping to gain two or three crowns; for it appeared so
natural to defend an unarmed man that he attached little value to his
services, considering his own danger not worth a thought. He put on
his best array, shaved, and made many reverences to the porter and the
numerous lackeys previous to an introduction to the master, who was
much more polite than the valets.
"Well, Thomas," said he, "how can I recompense what you have done for
me? Without your assistance I should have perished; and as my life is
a very happy one, I value it accordingly."
Poor Thomas was at a loss how to reply; he stammered out, "My
Lord--your Grace," but could get no further.
The master, in order to relieve the poor man, interrupted him thus: "I
understand better than yourself, perhaps, what would suit you; I would
not wish to draw you from your native condition, for I believe that
none is more truly happy; but I present to you and your children's
children, in perpetuity, the cottage which you inhabit in the forest.
You and they shall have the power of cutting as much wood every year
as you can use; you shall work for yourself; and if your sons like to
hunt, all the game which they kill shall be for their own use. I only
exact that you sell nothing, and that while possessing every comfort,
you seek not to quit your peaceful obscurity."
Thomas was so astonished that he could find no words to express his
gratitude. He came home to his wife, who heartily shared his joy. The
sons immediately set off for a large supply of faggots, and made a
great fire; but when they had been thoroughly warmed, Mother Thomas
began to say what a pity it was they could make no use of all the wood
which was not burned.
"An idea has just struck me," replied the husband; "our master gives
us all we can use; these are his own words,--very well; I shall be
able to use enough to bring us in a pretty little income!"
"How?" said his wife.
"When I was a boy," rejoined the woodcutter, "my father taught me to
make wooden shoes and I made them so light and so neat, that they were
everywhere sought for. What need now prevent me from exercising this
trade? James shall cut wood in the forest, Peter shall kill game for
dinner, and Paul, who has not the least brains of the three, shall go
to sell my merchandise at the neighbouring town. This will be a public
benefit, by enabling the poor about us to dress with more decency and
comfort, and it will also serve to furnish our own cottage, of which
we shall make a little palace."
The boys, who were present, highly relished this idea. Mother Thomas,
who was rather inclined to gluttony, made the most of the game which
Peter provided. A little labour, good cheer, a blazing fire, and
perfect family concord, rendered this family the happiest in the
world. The master came to the cottage, and seeing them so united and
industrious, encouraged the trade of the wooden shoes, which increased
their comforts without exposing them to the vices attendant on avarice
and luxury.
But happiness such as this seldom remains permanent. A flock of
furious wolves appeared in the forest; every day they devoured either
helpless children or travellers; they tore up the roots of the trees,
attacking even each other, while their wild howlings were heard night
and day in the cottage of the woodcutter.
Mother Thomas would no longer suffer her boys to leave home; and when
they did go in spite of her, she remained watching at the door
refusing either to eat or drink until they returned.
Such a situation was deplorable; when at length the young men, who
were very brave, resolved to deliver themselves and their master.
Taking arms, in case they should be attacked, they went into the
forest and digged deep pits, covering them with a little earth, laid
over some branches of trees; and during this heavy labour, which
lasted several days, they lighted great fires around them, in order to
hinder the wolves from approaching.
Success crowned their enterprise, for in returning to the spot at
sunrise, they perceived that one of the pits had been broken into
during the night, and that it was now quite uncovered. They charged
their muskets, and each were disputing the honour of first firing,
when they heard issue from the depths below, a mild and supplicating
voice imploring assistance.
"What shall we do?" said Peter; "assuredly that is not the roaring of
a wolf; it is, perhaps, some unfortunate little wandering child. How
lucky that we did not draw the trigger!"
They approached, and distinguished a beautiful lady richly dressed,
wearing on her head a cluster of diamonds, which shone like a star.
She appeared very young, and was trembling with cold. Much rain had
fallen during the night, and her robe, of silver gauze, was dabbled in
mud and water; her fair and tender hands were all dirty, which seemed
to vex her even more than the dangers she had experienced. She
continued, however, to struggle and to make signs for relief, when
three enormous wolves appeared at a distance. The brothers looked at
each other expressively, like people who feel that all is lost, but
who resolve to do their duty They had a cord about them, which Peter
fastened round his body, and let himself down into the pit. He took
the beautiful lady on his shoulders, while his brothers assisted in
drawing them up. They then stretched her on the grass, for she had
fainted; and now the wolves had just reached them,--when, lo! these
beasts of prey were instantly turned into three little lambs, and
licked the feet of the lady, who slowly returned to life.
"My good lads," said she to the woodcutters, "fear nothing. From
henceforth no more dangerous animals than these shall trouble you. But
I owe you a still greater recompense; lead me to your father; I wish
to felicitate him on the generosity and bravery of his sons."
The poor youths were so astonished by this adventure, that they felt
unable to reply; but they respectfully lifted her long train from the
ground, it having now recovered all its splendour.
The three lambs followed, skipping and frolicking before them--they
seemed to know the way; and Mother Thomas, who sat at the door looking
out for her children, was not a little surprised to behold their
companion.
She had, however, presence of mind to invite her noble guest to enter
and rest; much ashamed of having nothing better to offer than a straw
chair, and some spring-water, which was in a very clean pitcher on the
dresser.
"I shall willingly rest an hour with you," said the lady. "Although
you now see me for the first time, I am one of your best friends, of
which I shall give you a proof. I accept a glass of water, on
condition that your husband and children will also pledge me."
A glance of Mother Thomas's eye directed her family; they each sought
their ordinary drinking cup, which was of wood, and then bent the neck
of the pitcher; but what was their astonishment to perceive the vessel
turn into wrought-silver in their hands, and to taste, instead of
water, a liquor so delicious, that when the woodcutter and his wife
had drunk, they felt themselves ten years younger than before!
They threw themselves at the feet of the beautiful lady, in terror;
for a natural instinct made them feel that great power is always more
or less to be dreaded, even when employed in acts of beneficence. The
lady meanwhile kindly raised them, and having spoken of the courage
and generosity of their sons, who exposed themselves to the fury of
wolves rather than take flight and abandon her, she said that her name
was the Fairy Coquette, and that she would willingly relate her
history.
"Previously, madam," said the woodcutter, "will you have the goodness
to tell me, what is a fairy? During thirty years that I have inhabited
this forest, I have heard of the devil, of the Were wolf, of the
monster of Gévaudan, but never have I heard of fairies."
"We exist, notwithstanding," replied Coquette, "but not in all ages,
nor in all countries. We are supernatural beings, to whom has been
imparted a portion of supernatural power, which we make use of for
good or evil, according to our natural disposition; in that alone
consists our resemblance to men."
The woodcutter, who was very simple, understood little of this
explanation; but, like many others, had a profound respect for what he
could not comprehend. He bowed down to the ground, and only requested
the fairy to inform him, why a supernatural being, so highly gifted,
could have fallen into a pit prepared for wolves.
"It is," replied Coquette, "because I have an enemy still more
powerful than myself, the Enchanter Barabapatapouf, the most wicked
ogre in the world; he has but three teeth, three hairs, one eye, and
is fifteen feet high. With all these charms he happened to fall in
love with me, and merely for mischief I affected to accept him. He
then invited his friends to the nuptials; when, to his great
mortification, I took them to witness that I would never be the wife
of such a monster. Barabapatapouf was deeply incensed, swore to be
revenged, and has never lost an opportunity of keeping his word. I
should have remained three days in that horrible pit but for the
generosity of your children."
"They have done nothing more than their duty," replied the woodcutter.
"I must also do mine," said Coquette, "but my power is limited. I can
satisfy but two wishes, and it is necessary that each of you should
choose freely, unbiased by the other. You must separate accordingly,
and to-morrow at early dawn, come to inform me what you have all
resolved on during the night."
Mother Thomas was very uneasy in thinking how she could accommodate
the fairy, for neither her children's beds nor her own were worthy of
offering to such a grand lady; but Coquette desired her to feel at
ease, as she would provide everything needful. She then drew forth
some grains of sand, which she scattered on the floor. Instantly there
arose on the spot a bed of rose-leaves three feet high; the bolster
was of violets, heartsease and orange flowers, all breathing delicious
perfumes; and the counterpane, entirely composed of butterflies'
wings, exhibited colours so brilliant and varied that one could never
be weary of examining it. The three lambs which had followed the fairy
lay down at her feet, and as the room was rather damp, they gently
warmed it with their breath, with a care and intelligence almost
human. The woodcutter and his sons felt so surprised at all these
wonders, that they imagined themselves dreaming. Coquette warned
Mother Thomas that if she should speak once to her husband before she
again saw her, the wishes could not be realized. The strictest
injunctions were indeed necessary, to prevent their communicating on a
subject which interested both so deeply. When day appeared, Coquette
summoned them to her presence.
The woodcutter first came, and said, with his usual simplicity, that
he never could have believed it so difficult to form a wish. Till that
moment he had considered himself happy, but now finding it possible
to obtain one thing, he desired a thousand. Wearied with the fatigue
of thought, he had fallen asleep without coming to a determination;
but seeing in his dreams five purses filled with gold, it seemed as if
one were for him, one for his wife, and one for each of his children.
"Well," said the Coquette, "these purses are apparently your desire;
go then to the bin where you deposit your bread, and you will find
them. Only say how many pounds you wish them to contain."
"Oh, if there were but a hundred pounds in each," replied Thomas,
"that would be sufficient to extend our little commerce, and send our
wooden shoes to China itself."
"Your wish is accomplished," said the fairy; "go away, and permit your
wife to come in her turn."
The good dame had also passed a sleepless night, and had never before
been so much agitated or so unhappy; sometimes she wished for riches,
and then thought, riches would not prevent her from dying--so she had
better wish that she might live a hundred years. Now one idea filled
her mind, now another; it seemed as if the fairy should have given her
at least a month to deliberate. At last she suddenly said: "Madam
Fairy, I am very old, and what I desire most is a daughter, to assist
me in household management and to keep me company; my husband almost
lives in the woods and leaves me at break of day; my sons also go
about their business; we are without neighbours, and I have nobody to
speak to."
"Be it so," said the fairy; "you shall have the prettiest daughter
imaginable, and she shall speak from her birth, in order that no time
may be lost. Call your husband and sons; I hope to find all parties
content."
The little family assembled, but harmony was not the result of their
communications. The young men thought their father's wish quite
pitiful, and the woodcutter by no means relished the idea of another
child. The fairy, however, provided an excellent breakfast, and the
wine reanimated his spirits.
"Now I promise," said Coquette, "that you shall have a daughter, who
at the moment of her birth will be endowed with the figure and the
intelligence of twelve years old. Call her Rose, for her complexion
shall shame the flower which bears that name."
"And I pronounce that she shall also be as black as ebony, and
become, before the age of fifteen, the wife of a great king," said a
very strong voice in clear and distinct accents, accompanied by shouts
of laughter, which evidently proceeded from a great pitcher placed at
the corner of the chimney.
The Fairy Coquette turned pale, and consternation was general; but the
woodcutter, now merry with wine, joined in the laugh. "Ah! how droll,"
said he, "red and black roses! A likely story, indeed, that a great
king would come a-wooing to a woodcutter's daughter! Only a pitcher
could invent such nonsense, and I shall teach it to utter no more."
Thus saying, he gave the pitcher a great kick and broke it in pieces;
when there issued from it a smoke thick and black, and so stifling
that Coquette was obliged to use two bottles of essence to dissipate
its noxious effects.
"Ah, cruel Barabapatapouf!" cried she, "must your malignity then
extend even to those whom I wish to benefit? I indeed recognise my
enemy," said she to the woodcutter; "beware of him, and believe that
it is with no good intention he destines your daughter for the bride
of a king. Some mystery is here concealed, foreboding evil."
Every one was rendered quite melancholy by this adventure, and
Coquette, beginning to weary of these poor foresters, opened the
window and disappeared.
A great quarrel then arose between the woodcutter and his sons, who,
forgetting that respect in which they had never before failed,
reproached him for losing an opportunity of rendering them all happy.
"We might," said they, "have purchased estates, finery of all kinds,
and been as rich and noble as many who now despise us. One or two
millions would have been as easy said as five hundred pounds; that sum
would obtain a marquisate for my father, and baronies for each of us.
What extraordinary stupidity our parents have shown!"
"My children," said the woodcutter, "are these things, then, necessary
for happiness? It appeared to me that you were well satisfied when our
master only made our poverty a little less oppressive; and now, while
you have more gold than you ever saw in your lives, one would suppose
that you had been deeply injured, and could never know contentment
As for Mother Thomas, she was wiser, and so well pleased with the idea
of her daughter, that her imagination roamed no farther. In course of
time she gave birth to an infant; but scarcely had it seen the light
than it glided from her arms, and started up to the stature of a
well-formed girl of twelve or thirteen years old, who made a low
courtesy to the woodcutter, kissed the hand of her mother, and offered
her brothers a cordial embrace. But these lads ill-naturedly repulsed
the young stranger; they felt jealous, fearing that she would now be
preferred to them.
Rose, one might say, was born dressed, for flowing ringlets fell
around her shoulders, forming a complete covering; and with her
increase of size, appeared a little smart petticoat and brown bodice
in peasant fashion. Her delicate feet were clad in wooden shoes, but
both the foot and the shoe were so shapely, that any lady in the land
might have been proud to exhibit them. Her little plump hand was so
white that it hardly appeared formed for rustic labours, yet she
immediately prepared to assist in household matters, and the poor old
dame was never weary of caressing such a charming child.
A bed was prepared for Rose beside her mother. This good girl arose at
dawn to prepare the young men's breakfast; for she had an excellent
natural disposition, and so much intelligence that she seemed to know
by instinct that her birth was displeasing to them, and sought to
gain their regard by good-natured attentions.
Mother Thomas soon rose likewise, and returned to the kitchen. But
what was her horror on beholding her daughter's face black as ebony,
her hair woolly and crisped like a negro's! As there was no mirror in
the cottage, Rose could not understand what had so alarmed her mother;
she asked if she had involuntarily had the misfortune to give offence?
"No, no," said the old dame, weeping; "shouldst thou remain all thy
life as black as ink, I shall not love thee less; but I cannot without
pain recall thy beauties of yesterday. Thou wilt be laughed at; and us
too. Still, we will keep thee--thou must never leave us."
Rose readily promised she never would. But when her brothers returned,
they considered the change in her quite as a matter of course. They
recollected the prediction of the pitcher, and seemed quite delighted
to think that, since it was fulfilled in the first instance, they
might yet become the brothers of a queen.
Meanwhile they lived on better terms with Rose, hoping that one day
she might be of service to them. Far from listening to the counsels of
their father, they endeavoured to awaken in her mind the seeds of
ambition; and in order to further views interested and selfish,
flattered her beauty, her talents, and her sense, rendering the future
queen the most respectful homage, which diverted her exceedingly.
But, strange to say, Rose was not always black; every second day she
recovered her natural beauty, from whence it might be concluded, that
the influence of the fairy and the Enchanter Barabapatapouf operated
alternately. The woodcutter's family grew gradually accustomed to
these successions; and as habit reconciles people to all things, each
colour became indifferent to them.
Thomas was too old to change his mode of life; he would not hear of
going to live in town, although they had money sufficient for that
purpose; he also still continued the making of wooden shoes. Those
which Rose wore in winter were trimmed with lamb's-wool, which she
wrought very dexterously; she was clever and ingenious but, it must be
confessed, a little imperious; and was sometimes surprised sighing
like a person indulging in visionary wishes, and languishing under
some secret chagrin.
A year passed: Rose grew tall, and her brothers, weary of waiting for
an event so uncertain as her marriage with a king, executed a crime
which they had long meditated. Seeing that their father had touched
but one of the purses, they easily obtained possession of the rest,
and rising with the dawn, all three departed, saying, to satisfy their
consciences, that these purses must be finally theirs, and that they
would, meanwhile, turn them to advantage. When they should become very
rich, they would come back to their parents and take care of their
latter days. Each of them made a belt, in which he concealed his gold;
and with perfect concord, more frequently found amongst knaves than
honest men, they travelled a hundred leagues in eight days.
The woodcutter and his wife did not at first comprehend the extent of
their misfortune. They thought their children must have gone astray in
the forest, and the old man wandered everywhere in search of them. But
when he observed the loss of the purses, the truth was revealed, and
he felt ready to die with grief. "Cursed gold!" cried he, "thou hast
corrupted my brave and honest boys; they were poor, but virtuous; they
are now become villains, and will meet punishment from either man or
God!"
Thus saying, he took the remaining purse, and flung it into the bottom
of a well. Mother Thomas was vexed, but dared not speak, for the
unfortunate man was so much irritated and troubled that he would have
beaten her.
When his reason cleared a little, however, he felt that he had
committed an error in parting with his money, they being both old and
unable to work as formerly. The dame sold some articles which had been
purchased during their prosperity. But poverty was nothing; it was the
conduct of their sons which inflicted the bitter sting. How was this
then augmented, when some officers of justice arrived, and announced
that James, Peter, and Paul had been arrested. It seemed that while
drinking together in a public-house, they had spread on a table all
their gold. The host surprised them, and not believing that young
peasants, so coarsely clothed and wearing wooden shoes, could lawfully
be in possession of such a sum, he had given them in charge. The poor
boys, quite terrified, related the story of the Fairy Coquette; but
as the magistrate had never seen a fairy, he did not believe one word
of the matter.
Having then no hope but in the kindness of their father, they sent to
summon the woodcutter and his wife, who confirmed all their
assertions. But as no money was found in the cottage, whose
inhabitants appeared to subsist on their labour, the officers knew not
what to think.
Meantime they arrested the woodcutter for the purpose of identifying
his children. Pale, and trembling like criminals, the old couple
followed the guards. Mother Thomas was ready to faint, and doubly
grieved for leaving poor Rose all alone, especially as this was her
day for being white and beautiful. She begged her not to leave the
house, but to live on the milk of her sheep, and to bake cakes of some
meal which was in the bin. Their adieus were heart-rending; although
the soldiers declared that in three days the forester should be at
liberty to return, provided the innocence of his family was
established. Rose believed them, and endeavoured to take courage. But
more than a month passed, and no tidings of her parents. She could not
then prevent herself from wandering a little on the highway; and
having walked till sunset, wept so bitterly, that her beauty indeed
must have been a fairy-gift to remain uninjured.
One evening, being more worn out than usual, she seated herself at the
foot of a tree and fell asleep. A slight noise awoke her, and, on
looking up, she perceived a young gentleman richly dressed, who was
contemplating her with evident astonishment. "Art thou a goddess, or a
simple mortal?" cried he.
"Sir," replied Rose, "I am the daughter of a poor woodcutter, who
lives in the forest;--it is late, and I beg you will not detain me."
"You are a wayward beauty, indeed!" replied the prince, for so he was;
"but as my way lies in that direction, I hope you will permit me to
see you home."
"It is not in my power to prevent you," said Rose, without raising her
The prince at this moment remarked that she had been weeping, and,
delighted to have an opportunity of offering sympathy and consolation,
entreated her to impart her grief to him. "I am not actuated by mere
curiosity," added he; "I never can behold a woman in tears without
feeling moved to the bottom of my soul! Tell me your distress, and I
will neither sleep nor eat till I have aided you."
Rose timidly raised her lovely blue eyes, to see whether the
countenance of the prince harmonised with his discourse; but although
he was not actually ugly, his features wore an expression too stern
and hypocritical to invite her confidence. She therefore walked
silently forward, and when near the cottage felt so uneasy, that, for
the first time, she invented a lie in order to get rid of him. "You
seem to compassionate my sorrows," said she; "meanwhile you only
increase them. When my mother sees me accompanied by a great gentleman
like you, she will beat me, and not believe that you have followed me
against my will."
This reasoning appeared so just to the prince, who felt himself
affected by a passion such as he had never before experienced, that he
consented to retire, entreating Rose to meet him the next evening at
the same hour. She refused to give a decisive answer, and returned
home much dejected; recalling all the words of the stranger, and
almost reproaching herself for having behaved so harshly to him.
The following day Rose took mechanically the same route, going always
in the path by which her parents might be expected. Her provisions
being nearly exhausted, she feared to die of hunger, and began to
think that this gentleman, who had been repulsed so rudely, could,
perhaps, obtain news of her family. Suddenly beholding him leaning
against a tree, looking very melancholy and dejected, she threw
herself at his feet, bathed in tears, and said--
"Sir, a wretch who has lost everything dear, supplicates your
compassion. You are so kind--so tender-hearted--"
"What does the vile creature want!" exclaimed the prince, with a
savage expression. "How dare you have the impertinence to address me?
I wonder what prevents me from shooting you. I lost my sport all
yesterday in following a pretty girl, here is game of a new
description."
Rose started up, overwhelmed with terror, while the prince laughed
most brutally. It was not till that moment she recollected that this
her black day, which accounted for his not recognising her. "Ah!"
thought she, "this is the humane man who could not behold a woman
weep; because my colour displeases him, he is ready to take my life.
No hope now remains for me--my misfortunes are at their height!"
Rose wept all night; yet she could not prevent herself from returning
to the same spot on the following day; she felt irresistibly led
thither, dreading, and yet wishing, to meet the prince.
He had been already waiting above an hour, and accosted her with a
degree of respect quite unusual for him; but he was in love, and love
makes the worst of people better for the time.
"Cruel beauty!" said he, in a courtier-like style, to which Rose was
little accustomed, "what have I not suffered during your absence! I
even remained all night in the wood, in expectation of you, and the
queen my mother despatched messengers everywhere, fearing some
accident had befallen me."
"The queen, your mother!" exclaimed Rose. "Are you, then, the son of a
queen?"
"I have betrayed myself!" said the prince, striking his forehead in a
theatrical manner. "Yes, it is true, I have that misfortune. You will
now fear me; and what we fear, we never love."
"The wicked alone are to be feared," answered Rose. "I am very glad to
hear that you are a king, for I know that you will be my husband."
The prince, who little guessed the enchanter's communication, was
confounded by the unembarrassed freedom of her manner; but it was far
from displeasing to him. "You are ambitious," said he, smiling; "but
there is nothing to which beauty may not pretend. Tell me only how I
can have the happiness of serving you, and you shall see that
everything is possible to love."
Rose sat down on the grass, and related in very simple terms the story
of the purse; confessed that she had deceived him, and that, so far
from being severely treated at home, she was now weeping her mother's
loss; that the king must take measures for the discovery and
liberation of her family, before he could hope to win her affections,
or pretend to her hand.
The enamoured monarch vowed he would not lose a moment; and although
she behaved with much dignity, her every word and look was adorable in
his eyes. Rose thought all night of the fine fortune of being a queen;
she would then no longer wear wooden shoes; and, above all, might have
an opportunity of being useful to her dear parents.
These meetings continued every alternate day during a week; and the
queen dowager was informed that her son neglected all business, and
thought of nothing but making love. She was in despair. This prince
was surnamed the Terrible, by reason of his ferocity to women: till
that moment he had never loved, but he had frequently made pretence of
it, and when successful, it was not unusual with him to cut out the
poor ladies' tongues, put out their eyes, or even throw them into the
sea. The least pretext sufficed for this; and the queen, who was of a
kind disposition, lamented that yet another victim was preparing. The
courtiers begged her to be tranquil; said it was nothing more than the
daughter of a poor woodcutter whom his majesty now admired, and that
if he did kill her, it would be of little consequence.
But the courtiers, and the queen dowager herself, were altogether
bewildered when the king, having liberated the woodcutter and his
family, brought Rose to the palace as his wife. She was not at all
abashed or out of countenance; she behaved with the utmost respect to
the queen, and with affability to all. It was universally remarked:
"The king has committed a folly, but that charming girl is his excuse,
and no man would have been wiser under similar circumstances."
A grand ball was given in the evening. Rose danced well enough for a
queen; and she yielded herself up entirely to the enchantment of such
a happy day. The prince, ever eager to be near her, was figuring away
in a quadrille, when twelve o'clock struck: great, then, was his
astonishment, while gazing passionately on his partner, he beheld--a
negress!
"What metamorphosis is this?" cried he, rudely seizing her arm; "where
is the princess I married to-day?"
Rose bent her head in confusion; it still bore her diamonds, and her
crown,--no doubt could exist of her identity.
"Wretched, hideous black, thou shalt surely die!" cried the king;
"none shall deceive me with impunity." He then drew a poniard, and was
preparing to take instant vengeance, when, recollecting himself--"I do
thee too much honour," said he; "rather let my cooks cut thee in
pieces to make a hash for my hounds."
The old queen, as humane as her son was cruel, knew there was but one
means of saving the unfortunate victim; this was to appear still more
enraged than the king.
"I truly feel this injury," said she; "some times you have reproached
my weakness, but now behold a proof that I also can avenge. Your
orders must be strictly fulfilled--I myself shall witness the
execution." She then signed to the guards to lay hold of the
unfortunate Rose, who was dragged away by an iron chain fastened round
her neck. She gave herself up for lost, and uttering the most
heart-rending cries, was led away to a pigeon-house at the end of the
palace, furnished with some clean straw, where, however, the queen
promised to come on the following day.
Her majesty kept her word. Much affected by the sweetness of the
hapless bride, she promised to mitigate, as far as possible, her
melancholy situation.
Rose, very grateful, supplicated her benefactress to inform the
woodcutter's family that she was still alive, knowing what they would
suffer should the story reach them of the black Rose having
breakfasted the king's hounds. The queen promised to employ a
confidential domestic; and Rose, who had still preserved her wooden
shoes, sent one, that her father might recognise his handiwork.
A few days afterwards a young peasant arrived from the cottage; he
brought some cakes and cheese, made by Mother Thomas, which Rose
preferred to all the delicacies of the palace.
This young peasant, who was named Mirto, related to Rose everything
concerning her dear parents, and took back very loving messages from
her to them.
Mirto found so much pleasure in conversing with the fair prisoner, and
had so often cakes to carry, that they were seldom asunder. He said he
was an orphan, and having some work to do in the prison where Thomas
had been confined, there formed a friendship with the family. In
return for some little services then rendered them, he desired to
learn the trade of the wooden shoes; being very ingenious, he became a
valuable acquisition. He never had felt so happy before. In truth, he
was not aware that this happiness received its date from the hour in
which he first saw Rose.
Alas! the poor Rose was only too sensible of his affection, and
feeling the duty of struggling against it, found herself still more
miserable than before.
"Whatever may be the conduct of Prince Terrible," said she to herself,
"I have married him. It is certainly very hard to love a husband who
wished to kill me, but still I should not permit myself to love
another."
For a whole month following she had sufficient resolution to see Mirto
no more, and was becoming sick with chagrin and weariness. The queen
visited her frequently, bringing all sorts of sweetmeats, and a
singing-bird, to divert her captivity. She brought no finery; indeed,
that would have been quite thrown away on the pigeons.
At length, one day Rose heard a great noise in the palace. People kept
running to and fro--all the bells were rung, and all the cannons
fired. The poor prisoner mounted up to one of the pigeon-holes, and
peeping through, perceived the palace hung with black. She knew not
what to think. But some one of the queen's officers appeared, and
conducted her in due form to the court. Rose, all trembling, inquired
what had happened.
"Your majesty is a widow," replied the officer; "the king has been
killed in hunting; here are your weeds, of which the queen begs your
acceptance."
Rose was much agitated, but she followed the officer in silence, with
a sad and serious aspect, as a dignified personage should do when
informed of the death of a husband.
The queen was a tender mother, and although fully conscious of the
ferocious disposition of her son, she deeply lamented him, and wept
bitterly on embracing her daughter-in-law. "You husband is no more,"
said she; "forget his errors, my dear child; the remainder of my life
shall be devoted to making atonement for them."
The princess threw herself at her benefactress' feet, and declared all
was forgotten. "If your majesty deigns to permit me to speak
candidly," added she, "and will bestow a moment's attention, I shall
confess the dearest wishes of my heart!"
"Speak," said the queen; "nothing now can assuage my grief, save an
opportunity of proving to you my friendship."
"I was not born for a queen," continued Rose. "My mother is a poor
forester, but she has been a tender parent, and weeps incessantly for
my absence."
"Let her be conducted hither," replied the queen.
"This is not all, madam," continued Rose; "I confess that I love a
young peasant, who has assisted my father to make wooden shoes. If I
were the wife of Mirto, and your majesty would have the goodness to
give some assistance to my family, my old father might be freed from
labour, and I the happiest woman in the world."
The queen embraced Rose, and promised all she wished. She then
conducted her to the forest; and just as they had reached its
boundary, they perceived in the air a mahogany car, mounted on wheels
of mother-o'-pearl; two pretty white lambs were yoked to it, which
Rose immediately recognised as those of the Fairy Coquette.
The car descended, and the fairy alighting thus addressed the queen:
"Madam, I come to seek my child, and am delighted to find you willing
to part with her, for she has a lover whom I approve;--who loves her
faithfully, though hopelessly, which is a thing more rare than all the
treasures of your majesty's crown."
The fairy then addressing herself to Rose, related that her enemy, the
Enchanter Barabapatapouf, had just been killed in combat with another
giant. "Now," added Coquette, "I have full power to render you happy;"
and passing her fair hand over Rose's face, the negro colour and
features vanished--to reappear no more.
The queen, convinced that her daughter-in-law required nothing
further, offered only her portrait, as a token of esteem and
friendship. Rose received it with grateful respect, then ascended the
fairy's car, and was in a few minutes surrounded by the foresters, who
never wearied of caressing her. Poor Mirto drew back, trembling, not
knowing whether to hope or fear; but Coquette, perceiving their mutual
embarrassment, declared that she had ordained this marriage from the
very beginning. She blessed them, gave them a flock of beautiful white
sheep, a cottage covered with honeysuckles and roses, a lovely garden
abounding with fruits and flowers, and a moderate sum of money;
endowing them also with life for a hundred years, uninterrupted
health, and constant love.
BROTHER AND SISTER.
A brother took his sister by the hand and said, "Since our mother is
dead we have no more happy hours: our stepmother beats us every day,
and whenever we come near her she kicks us away. She gives us hard
crusts and nasty scraps to eat, and the dog under the table fares
better than we do, for he does sometimes get a nice bit thrown to him.
It would break our mother's heart if she knew it! Come, we will go out
into the wide world together."
They went along the whole day through meadows, over rocks and stones,
and when it rained the little sister said, "Heaven and our hearts are
crying together." In the evening they came to a great wood, and were
so worn out with grief, hunger, and weariness, that they sat down in a
hollow tree and went to sleep.
The next morning, when they awoke, the sun was already high in the
heavens, and shone down very hot on the tree. Upon which said the
brother, "Sister, I am thirsty; I would go and have a drink if I knew
where there was a spring: I think I can hear one trickling." He got
up, took his sister by the hand, and they went to look for the spring.
The wicked stepmother, however, who was a witch, and well knew how the
children had run away, had crept after them secretly, in the way
witches do, and had bewitched all the springs in the wood. When they
had found a spring that was dancing brightly over the stones, the
brother stooped down to drink; but his sister heard a voice in its
murmur, which said, "Whoever drinks of me will become a tiger."
Eagerly the little sister cried, "I pray thee, brother, do not drink,
lest thou become a wild beast and tear me to pieces."
The brother did not drink, although he was so thirsty, but said, "I
will wait for the next spring." When they came to the next, the little
sister heard it say, "Who drinks of me will become a wolf; who drinks
of me will become a wolf!" and cried out, "Oh brother, I pray thee do
not drink, lest thou become a wolf and eat me up."
The brother did not drink, but said, "I will wait till I come to the
next spring, but then I must drink, say what you will, for my thirst
is getting unbearable."
And when they came to the third spring, the little sister heard a
voice in its murmur, saying, "Whoever drinks of me will become a roe,"
and she cried, "Oh brother, do not drink, I pray thee, lest thou
become a roe and run away from me." But the brother had already knelt
down by the stream, stooped down, and drank of the water; and as soon
as the first drop touched his lips, there he lay--a white roe.
The little sister cried over her poor bewitched brother, and the roe
cried also as he rested mournfully beside her. At last the maiden
said, "Never mind, dear Roe, I will never forsake you." So she took
off her golden garter and put it round the roe's neck, then pulled
some rushes and wove them into a cord. To this she tied the little
animal and led him on, and they both went still deeper into the wood.
When they had gone a long, long way, they came at last to a little
house, into which the maiden peeped; and as it was empty, she thought,
"Here we may stay and live." So she made a pretty bed of leaves and
moss for the roe; and every morning she went out and gathered roots,
berries, and nuts for herself; and for the roe she brought tender
grass, which he ate out of her hand, and played about and was very
happy. In the evening, when the little sister was tired and had said
her prayers, she laid her head upon the roe, who was her pillow, and
went sweetly to sleep; and if her brother had only kept his proper
shape, they would have led a very happy life.
They had lived alone in this way during a long time, when it happened
that the king of the country held a great hunt in the forest. Through
the trees might be heard the blowing of horns, the barking of dogs,
and the joyous cries of the hunters, which when the little roe heard
he was almost beside himself with delight. "Oh," said he to his
sister, "let me go and see the hunt: I can no longer refrain;" and he
begged hard till she consented.
"But," said she, "when you return at evening I shall have shut my door
against the wild huntsmen, and in order that I may know you, knock
and say, 'My little sister, let me in;' but if you do not say so, I
shall not open the door."
Now off sprang the roe, and was so happy to find himself in the open
air. The king and his huntsmen saw the beautiful beast and set off
after him, but they could not catch him; for when they thought they
had certainly got him, he sprang over a bush and disappeared. When it
was dark he galloped up to the little house, knocked, and cried, "My
little sister, let me in." And when the door was opened he sprang in,
and rested all night on his pretty little bed. Next morning the hunt
began again, and when the roe heard the blast of the horns, and the
"Ho! ho!" of the hunters, he could not rest, and cried, "Sister, open
the door; I must go."
His sister opened the door and said, "But mind you must be back in the
evening and make your little speech, that I may let you in."
When the king and his huntsmen saw the white roe with the gold band
once more, they all rode after him, but he was too quick and agile for
them. This chase lasted the whole day; at last, towards evening, the
hunters surrounded him, and wounded him with an arrow in the foot, so
that he was forced to limp and go slowly. One of the hunters, creeping
softly after him to the little house, heard him say, "My sister, let
me in," and saw that the door was opened and immediately shut to
again; so he went back to the king, and told him all he had seen and
heard.
"We will have another hunt to-morrow," said the king.
The little sister was greatly alarmed when she saw her white roe was
wounded; she washed off the blood, laid herbs upon the place, and
said, "Go now to thy bed, dear Roe, and get well."
The wound, however, was so slight that the next morning he felt
nothing of it, and when he heard the noise of the hunt, he said, "I
cannot keep away; I must go, and nothing shall keep me."
His sister cried and said, "Now you will go and be killed, and leave
me here alone in the forest, forsaken by all the world; I will not let
you go out."
"Then I shall die here of grief," answered the roe: "for when I hear
the sound of the horn, I do feel as if I could jump out of my shoes."
So his sister could not do less than open the door with a heavy heart,
and the roe sprang out joyfully into the forest.
As soon as the king saw him, he said to his huntsmen, "Now hunt him
all day till evening, but don't do anything to hurt him."
When the sun was set the king said to his huntsman, "Now come and show
me the little house you saw in the wood." And when he was before the
door he knocked and cried, "Dear little sister, let me in."
Immediately the door opened, the king entered, and there stood a
maiden more beautiful than any one he had ever seen. The damsel was
frightened when she found there had come in, not her roe, but a man
who wore a golden crown on his head. But the king looked kindly at
her, took her hand and said, "Wilt thou go with me to my castle, and
be my dear wife?"
"Oh yes," answered the maiden, "but the roe must come with me, for I
cannot forsake him."
The king replied, "He shall remain with you as long as you live, and
shall want for nothing."
At this moment he came springing in, his sister tied the cord of
rushes round his neck, led him with her own hand, and they all left
the little house together.
The king took the beautiful maiden on his own horse and conducted her
to his castle, where the marriage was celebrated with great pomp. She
was now queen, and they lived a long time very happily together; while
the roe was petted and taken care of, and played all day about the
palace-garden.
But the wicked stepmother, on whose account these children had been
driven into the wide world, thought nothing less than that the little
sister had been torn to pieces by wild beasts in the forest, and that
the brother, in the shape of a roe, had been killed by the hunters.
When she now heard they were so happy, and that everything went well
with them, envy and spite raged in her heart and gave her no rest, and
her only thought was how she could do some mischief to them both. Her
own daughter, who was as ugly as the night and had only one eye, was
continually reproaching her, and saying, "It is I who ought to have
been made queen."
"Never mind," said the old witch to console her; "when the time comes
I will manage it."
By and by the queen gave birth to a beautiful little boy; and the king
being away at the hunt, the old witch took upon herself the form of
the lady-in-waiting, entered the room where the queen lay, and said to
her, "Come, the bath is ready, which will do you good and give you new
strength; make haste before it gets cold." Her daughter was also at
hand, and they carried the poor weak queen between them into the
bathroom, and laid her in the bath: then they shut the door and ran
away. But under the bath they had first lighted a great furnace-fire,
so that the beautiful young queen could not save herself from being
scorched alive.
When that was done the old witch took her own daughter, put a cap on
her, and laid her on the bed in the queen's room. She changed her also
into the shape of the young queen, all except her one eye, and she
could not give her another. But in order that the king might not
observe it, she was obliged to lie on that side where there was no
eye. In the evening, when he was come home, and heard that he had a
little son, he was very much delighted, and wished to visit his dear
wife and see how she was getting on; on which the old woman cried out
in a great hurry, "As you value your life, don't touch the curtain;
the queen must not see the light, and must be left quite quiet." So
the king went away, and never found out that it was a false queen in
the bed.
But when it was midnight, and all the world was asleep, the nurse who
was sitting beside the cradle, and who was the only person awake, saw
the door open and the true queen come in. She took the baby out of the
cradle, laid it in her arms, and nursed it tenderly. She then shook
up the pillows, laid it down again, and covered it with the
counterpane. She did not forget the roe either, but went into the
corner where it lay, and stroked it gently. After this she passed out,
quite silently, through the door; and the nurse inquired next morning
of the sentinels whether any one had gained entrance into the palace
during the night, but they answered, "No--we have seen nobody." She
continued to come in the same way for several nights, though she spoke
never a word: the nurse always saw her, but never dared to mention it.
When some time had passed, the queen at last began to speak, and
    "How is my baby? How is my roe?
    I can come again twice, then for ever must go."
The nurse could not answer her; but when she had disappeared she went
to the king, and told him all about it, upon which he cried, "What
does it mean? I will myself watch by the child to-night."
In the evening he came to the nursery, and there at midnight the dead
queen appeared, and said--
    I can come but once more, then for ever must go;"
and nursed and fondled the baby as before, then vanished. The king did
not dare to address her, but watched again the following night. This
time she said--
    I can come but this once, then for ever must go."
Upon which the king could no longer contain himself, but sprang
forward and cried, "Thou canst surely be no one but my own dear wife!"
She replied, "Yes, I am thy dear wife;" and as soon as she had spoken
these words she was restored to life, and became once more fresh and
blooming.
Then she related to the king the crime committed on her by the old
witch and her ugly daughter, whom he at once commanded to be brought
to judgment, and had sentence passed upon them. The daughter was taken
forth into the woods, where the wild beasts tore her in pieces, and
the witch was burnt. And behold! as soon as there was nothing left of
her but ashes, the white roe became changed again and resumed his
human form; so they all lived happily together till the end of their
lives.
LITTLE RED-RIDING-HOOD.
Once there was a little village maiden, the prettiest ever seen. Her
mother was foolishly fond of her, and her grandmother likewise. The
old woman made for her a little hood, which became the damsel so well,
that ever after she went by the name of Little Red-Riding-Hood. One
day, when her mother was making cakes, she said, "My child, you shall
go and see your grandmother, for I hear she is not well; and you shall
take her some of these cakes, and a pot of butter."
Little Red-Riding-Hood was delighted to go, though it was a long walk;
but she was a good child, and fond of her kind grandmother. Passing
through a wood, she met a great wolf, who was most eager to eat her
up, but dared not, because of a woodcutter who was busy hard by. So he
only came and asked her politely where she was going. The poor child,
who did not know how dangerous it is to stop and speak to wolves,
replied, "I am going to see my grandmother, and to take her a cake and
a pot of butter, which my mother has sent her."
"Is it very far from hence?" asked the wolf.
"Oh yes, it is just above the mill which you may see up there--the
first house you come to in the village."
"Well," said the wolf, "I will go there also, to inquire after your
excellent grandmother; I will go one way, and you the other, and we
will see who can be there first."
So he ran as fast as ever he could, taking the shortest road, but the
little maiden took the longest; for she stopped to pluck roses in the
wood, to chase butterflies, and gather nosegays of the prettiest
flowers she could find--she was such a happy and innocent little soul.
The wolf was not long in reaching the grand-mother's door. He knocked,
Toc--toc, and the grandmother said, "Who is there?"
"It is your child, Little Red-Riding-Hood," replied the wicked beast,
imitating the girl's voice; "I bring you a cake and a pot of butter,
which my mother has sent you."
The grandmother, who was ill in her bed, said, "Very well, my dear,
pull the string and the latch will open." The wolf pulled the
string--the door flew open; he leaped in, fell upon the poor old
woman, and ate her up in less than no time, tough as she was, for he
had not tasted anything for more than three days. Then he carefully
shut the door, and laying himself down snugly in the bed, waited for
Little Red-Riding-Hood, who was not long before she came and knocked,
Toc--toc, at the door.
"Who is there?" said the wolf; and the little maiden, hearing his
gruff voice, felt sure that her poor grandmother must have caught a
bad cold and be very ill indeed.
So she answered cheerfully, "It is your child, Little
Red-Riding-Hood, who brings you a cake and a pot of butter that my
mother has sent you."
Then the wolf, softening his voice as much as he could, said, "Pull
the string, and the latch will open."
So Little Red-Riding-Hood pulled the string and the door opened. The
wolf, seeing her enter, hid himself as much as he could under the
cover-lid of the bed, and said in a whisper, "Put the cake and the pot
of butter on the shelf, and then make haste and come to bed, for it is
very late."
Little Red-Riding-Hood did not think so; but, to please her
grandmother, she undressed herself and began to get ready for bed,
when she was very much astonished to find how different the old woman
looked from ordinary.
"Grandmother, what great arms you have!"
"That is to hug you the better, my dear."
"Grandmother, what great ears you have!"
"That is to hear you the better, my dear."
"Grandmother, what great eyes you have!"
"That is to see you the better, my dear."
"Grandmother, what a great mouth you have!"
"That is to eat you up," cried the wicked wolf; and immediately he
fell upon poor Little Red-Riding-Hood, and ate her up in a moment.
PUSS IN BOOTS.
A Miller, dying, divided all his property between his three children.
This was a very simple matter, as he had nothing to leave but his
mill, his ass, and his cat; so he made no will, and called in no
lawyer, who would, probably, have taken a large slice out of these
poor possessions. The eldest son took the mill, the second the ass,
while the third was obliged to content himself with the cat, at which
he grumbled very much. "My brothers," said he, "by putting their
property together, may gain an honest livelihood, but there is nothing
left for me except to die of hunger; unless, indeed, I were to kill my
cat and eat him, and make a coat out of his skin, which would be very
scanty clothing."
The cat, who heard the young man talking to himself, sat up on his
four paws, and looking at him with a grave and wise air, said,
"Master, I think you had better not kill me; I shall be much more
useful to you alive."
"How so?" asked his master.
"You have but to give me a sack, and a pair of boots such as gentlemen
wear when they go shooting, and you will find you are not so ill off
as you suppose."
Now, though the young miller did not much depend upon the cat's words,
still he thought it rather surprising that a cat should speak at all.
And he had before now seen him show so much adroitness and cleverness
in catching rats and mice, that it seemed advisable to trust him a
little farther, especially as, poor young fellow! he had nobody else
to trust.
When the cat got his boots, he drew them on with a grand air, and
slinging his sack over his shoulder, and drawing the cords of it round
his neck, he marched bravely to a rabbit-warren hard by, with which he
was well acquainted. Then, putting some bran and lettuces into his
bag, and stretching himself out beside it as if he were dead, he
waited till some fine fat young rabbit, ignorant of the wickedness and
deceit of the world, should peer into the sack to eat the food that
was inside. This happened very shortly, for there are plenty of
foolish young rabbits in every warren; and when one of them, who
really was a splendid fat fellow, put his head inside, Master Puss
drew the cords immediately, and took him and killed him without mercy.
Then, very proud of his prey, he marched direct up to the palace, and
begged to speak with the king. He was desired to ascend to the
apartments of his majesty, where, making a low bow, he said,
"Sire, here is a magnificent rabbit, killed in the warren which
belongs to my lord the Marquis of Carabas, and which he has desired me
to offer humbly to your majesty."
"Tell your master," replied the king, politely, "that I accept his
present, and am very much obliged to him."
Another time, Puss went and hid himself and his sack in a wheat-field,
and there caught two splendid fat partridges in the same manner as he
had done the rabbit. When he presented them to the king, with a
similar message as before, his majesty was so pleased that he ordered
the cat to be taken down into the kitchen and given something to eat
and drink; where, while enjoying himself, the faithful animal did not
cease to talk in the most cunning way of the large preserves and
abundant game which belonged to my lord the Marquis of Carabas.
One day, hearing that the king was intending to take a drive along the
river-side with his daughter, the most beautiful princess in the
world, Puss said to his master, "Sir, if you would only follow my
advice, your fortune is made."
"Be it so," said the miller's son, who was growing very disconsolate,
and cared little what he did: "Say your say, cat."
"It is but little," replied Puss, looking wise, as cats can. "You have
only to go and bathe in the river, at a place which I shall show you,
and leave all the rest to me. Only remember that you are no longer
yourself, but my lord the Marquis of Carabas."
"Just so," said the miller's son; "it's all the same to me;" but he
did as the cat told him.
While he was bathing, the king and all the court passed by, and were
startled to hear loud cries of "Help, help! my lord the Marquis of
Carabas is drowning." The king put his head out of the carriage, and
saw nobody but the cat, who had, at different times, brought him so
many presents of game; however, he ordered his guards to fly quickly
to the succour of my lord the Marquis of Carabas. While they were
pulling the unfortunate marquis out of the water, the cat came up,
bowing, to the side of the king's carriage, and told a long and
pitiful story about some thieves, who, while his master was bathing,
had come and carried away all his clothes, so that it would be
impossible for him to appear before his majesty and the illustrious
"Oh, we will soon remedy that," answered the king, kindly; and
immediately ordered one of the first officers of the household to ride
back to the palace with all speed, and bring back the most elegant
supply of clothes for the young gentleman, who kept in the background
until they arrived. Then, being handsome and well-made, his new
clothes became him so well, that he looked as if he had been a marquis
all his days, and advanced with an air of respectful ease to offer his
thanks to his majesty.
The king received him courteously, and the princess admired him very
much. Indeed, so charming did he appear to her, that she hinted to her
father to invite him into the carriage with them, which, you may be
sure, the young man did not refuse. The cat, delighted at the success
of his scheme, went away as fast as he could, and ran so swiftly that
he kept a long way ahead of the royal carriage. He went on and on,
till he came to some peasants who were mowing in a meadow. "Good
people," said he, in a very firm voice, "the king is coming past here
shortly, and if you do not say that the field you are mowing belongs
to my lord the Marquis of Carabas, you shall all be chopped as small
as mince-meat."
So when the king drove by, and asked whose meadow it was where there
was such a splendid crop of hay, the mowers all answered, trembling,
that it belonged to my lord the Marquis of Carabas.
"You have very fine land, Marquis," said his majesty to the miller's
son; who bowed, and answered "that it was not a bad meadow, take it
altogether."
Then the cat came to a wheat-field, where the reapers were reaping
with all their might. He bounded in upon them: "The king is coming
past to-day, and if you do not tell him that this wheat belongs to my
lord the Marquis of Carabas, I will have you every one chopped as
small as mince-meat." The reapers, very much alarmed, did as they were
bid, and the king congratulated the Marquis upon possessing such
beautiful fields, laden with such an abundant harvest.
They drove on--the cat always running before and saying the same thing
to everybody he met, that they were to declare the whole country
belonged to his master; so that even the king was astonished at the
vast estate of my lord the Marquis of Carabas.
But now the cat arrived at a great castle where dwelt an Ogre, to whom
belonged all the land through which the royal equipage had been
driving. He was a cruel tyrant, and his tenants and servants were
terribly afraid of him, which accounted for their being so ready to
say whatever they were told to say by the cat, who had taken pains to
inform himself of all about the Ogre. So, putting on the boldest face
he could assume, Puss marched up to the castle with his boots on, and
asked to see the owner of it, saying that he was on his travels, but
did not wish to pass so near the castle of such a noble gentleman
without paying his respects to him. When the Ogre heard this message,
he went to the door, received the cat as civilly as an Ogre can, and
begged him to walk in and repose himself.
"Thank you, sir," said the cat; "but first I hope you will satisfy a
traveller's curiosity. I have heard in far countries of your many
remarkable qualities, and especially how you have the power to change
yourself into any sort of beast you choose--a lion for instance, or an
elephant."
"That is quite true," replied the Ogre; "and lest you should doubt it,
I will immediately become a lion."
He did so; and the cat was so frightened that he sprang up to the roof
of the castle and hid himself in the gutter--a proceeding rather
inconvenient on account of his boots, which were not exactly fitted to
walk with upon tiles. At length, perceiving that the Ogre had resumed
his original form, he came down again stealthily, and confessed that
he had been very much frightened.
"But, sir," said he, "it may be easy enough for such a big gentleman
as you to change himself into a large animal: I do not suppose you
can become a small one--a rat or mouse for instance. I have heard
that you can; still, for my part, I consider it quite impossible."
"Impossible!" cried the other, indignantly. "You shall see!" and
immediately the cat saw the Ogre no longer, but a little mouse running
along on the floor.
This was exactly what he wanted; and he did the very best a cat could
do, and the most natural under the circumstances--he sprang upon the
mouse and gobbled it up in a trice. So there was an end of the Ogre.
By this time the king had arrived opposite the castle, and was seized
with a strong desire to enter it. The cat, hearing the noise of the
carriage-wheels, ran forward in a great hurry, and standing at the
gate, said in a loud voice, "Welcome, sire, to the castle of my lord
the Marquis of Carabas."
"What!" cried his majesty, very much surprised, "does the castle also
belong to you? Truly, Marquis, you have kept your secret well up to
the last minute. I have never seen anything finer than this courtyard
and these battlements. Indeed, I have nothing like them in the whole
of my dominions."
The Marquis, without speaking, offered his hand to the princess to
assist her to descend, and, standing aside that the king might enter
first--for he had already acquired all the manners of a
court--followed his majesty to the great hall, where a magnificent
collation was laid out, and where, without more delay, they all sat
down to feast.
Before the banquet was over, the king, charmed with the good qualities
of the Marquis of Carabas--and likewise with his wine, of which he had
drunk six or seven cups--said, bowing across the table at which the
princess and the miller's son were talking very confidentially
together, "It rests with you, Marquis, whether you will not become my
"I shall be only too happy," said the complaisant Marquis, and the
princess's cast-down eyes declared the same.
So they were married the very next day, and took possession of the
Ogre's castle, and of everything that had belonged to him.
As for the cat, he became at once a grand personage, and had never
more any need to run after mice, except for his own diversion.
THE WOLF
The Seven Young Goslings.
There was once an old goose who had seven young goslings, and loved
them as only a mother can love her children. One day she was going
into the wood to seek for provender, and before setting off she called
all seven to her and said, "Dear children, I am obliged to go into the
wood, so be on your guard against the wolf; for if he gets in here he
will eat you up, feathers, skin, and all. The villain often disguises
himself, but you can easily recognise him by his rough voice and black
paws."
The children answered, "Dear mother, we will take great care; you may
go without any anxiety." So the old lady was comforted, and set off
cheerfully for the wood.
Before long, some one knocked at the door, and cried, "Open, open, my
dear children; your mother is here, and has brought something for each
of you."
But the goslings soon perceived, by the rough voice, that it was the
wolf. "We will not open," said they; "you are not our mother, for she
has a sweet and lovely voice; but your voice is rough--you are the
wolf."
Thereupon the wolf set off to a merchant and bought a large lump of
chalk; he ate it, and it made his voice sweet. Back he came, knocked
at the door, and cried, "Open, open, my dear children; your mother is
here, and has brought something for each of you."
But the wolf had laid his black paw on the window-sill, and when the
children saw it, they cried, "We will not open; our mother has not
black feet like you--you are the wolf."
So the wolf ran off to the baker, and said, "I have hurt my foot, put
some dough on it." And when the baker had plastered it with dough, the
wolf went to the miller and cried, "Strew some meal on my paws." But
the miller thought to himself, "The wolf wants to deceive some one,"
and he hesitated to do it; till the wolf said, "If you don't do it at
once, I will eat you up." So the miller was afraid and made his paws
white. Such is the way of the world!
Now came the rogue back for the third time, knocked and said, "Open
the door, dear children; your mother has come home, and has brought
something for each of you out of the wood."
The little goslings cried, "Show us your paws first, that we may see
whether you are indeed our mother." So he laid his paws on the
window-sill, and when the goslings saw that they were white, they
believed it was all right, and opened the door; and who should come in
but the wolf!
They screamed out and tried to hide themselves; one jumped under the
table, another into the bed, the third into the oven; the fourth ran
into the kitchen, the fifth hopped into a chest, the sixth under the
wash-tub, and the seventh got into the clock-case. But the wolf seized
them, and stood on no ceremony with them; one after another he gobbled
them all up, except the youngest, who being in the clock-case he
couldn't find. When the wolf had eaten his fill, he strolled forth,
laid himself down in the green meadow under a tree, and went fast
Not long after, back came the old goose home from the wood; but what,
alas! did she see? The house-door stood wide open; table, chairs,
benches, were all overthrown; the wash-tub lay in the ashes; blankets
and pillows were torn off the bed. She looked for her children, but
nowhere could she find them; she called them each by name, but nobody
answered. At last, when she came to the youngest, a little squeaking
voice answered, "Dear mother, I am in the clock-case." She pulled him
out, and he told her how the wolf had come and had eaten up all the
others. You may think how she wept for her dear children.
At last, in her grief, she went out, and the youngest gosling ran
beside her. And when she came to the meadow there lay the wolf under
the tree, snoring till the boughs shook. She walked round and examined
him on all sides, till she perceived that something was moving and
kicking about inside him.
"Can it be," thought she, "that my poor children whom he has swallowed
for his supper are yet alive?" So she sent the little gosling back to
the house for scissors, needle, and thread, and began to slit up the
monster's stomach. Scarcely had she given one snip, when out came the
head of a gosling, and when she had cut a little further, the six
jumped out one after another, not having taken the least hurt, because
the greedy monster had swallowed them down whole. That was a joy! They
embraced their mother tenderly, and skipped about as lively as a
tailor at his wedding.
But the old goose said, "Now go and find me six large stones, which we
will put inside the greedy beast while he is still asleep." So the
goslings got the stones in all haste, and they put them inside the
wolf; and the old goose sewed him up again in a great hurry, while he
never once moved nor took any notice.
Now when the wolf at last woke up and got upon his legs, he found he
was very thirsty, and wished to go to the spring to drink. But as soon
as he began to move the stones began to shake and rattle inside him,
till he cried,--
    "What's this rumbling and tumbling,
       What's this rattling like bones?
     I thought I had eaten six little geese,
       But they've turned out only stones."
And when he came to the spring and bent down his head to drink, the
heavy stones overbalanced him, and in he went head over heels. Now
when the seven goslings saw this, they came running up, crying
loudly, "The wolf is dead, the wolf is dead!" and danced for joy all
round the spring, and their mother with them.
THE FAIR ONE WITH GOLDEN LOCKS.
There was once a king's daughter so beautiful that they named her the
Fair One with Golden Locks. These golden locks were the most
remarkable in the world, soft and fine, and falling in long waves down
to her very feet. She wore them always thus, loose and flowing,
surmounted with a wreath of flowers; and though such long hair was
sometimes rather inconvenient, it was so exceedingly beautiful,
shining in the sun like ripples of molten gold, that everybody agreed
she fully deserved her name.
Now there was a young king of a neighbouring country, very handsome,
very rich, and wanting nothing but a wife to make him happy. He heard
so much of the various perfections of the Fair One with Golden Locks,
that at last, without even seeing her, he fell in love with her so
desperately that he could neither eat nor drink, and resolved to send
an ambassador at once to demand her in marriage. So he ordered a
magnificent equipage--more than a hundred horses and a hundred
footmen--in order to bring back to him the Fair One with Golden Locks,
who, he never doubted, would be only too happy to become his queen.
Indeed, he felt so sure of her that he refurnished the whole palace,
and had made, by all the dressmakers of the city, dresses enough to
last a lady for a lifetime. But, alas! when the ambassador arrived and
delivered his message, either the princess was in a bad humor, or the
offer did not appear to be to her taste; for she returned her best
thanks to his majesty, but said she had not the slightest wish or
intention to be married. She also, being a prudent damsel, declined
receiving any of the presents which the king had sent her; except
that, not quite to offend his majesty, she retained a box of English
pins, which were in that country of considerable value.
When the ambassador returned, alone and unsuccessful, all the court
was very much affected, and the king himself began to weep with all
his might. Now, there was in the palace household a young gentleman
named Avenant, beautiful as the sun, besides being at once so amiable
and so wise that the king confided to him all his affairs; and every
one loved him, except those people--to be found in all courts--who
were envious of his good fortune. These malicious folk hearing him say
gaily, "If the king had sent me to fetch the Fair One with Golden
Locks, I know she would have come back with me," repeated the saying
in such a manner, that it appeared as if Avenant thought so much of
himself and his beauty, and felt sure the princess would have followed
him all over the world; which when it came to the ears of the king, as
it was meant to do, irritated him so much that he commanded Avenant to
be imprisoned in a high tower, and left to die there of hunger. The
guards accordingly carried off the young man, who had quite forgotten
his idle speech, and had not the least idea what fault he had
committed. They ill-treated him very much, and then left him, with
nothing to eat and only water to drink. This, however, kept him alive
for a few days, during which he did not cease to complain aloud, and
to call upon the king, saying, "O king, what harm have I done? You
have no subject more faithful than I. Never have I had a thought which
could offend you."
And it so befell that the king, coming by chance, or else with a sort
of remorse, past the tower, was touched by the voice of the young
Avenant, whom he had once so much regarded. In spite of all the
courtiers could do to prevent him, he stopped to listen, and overheard
these words. The tears rushed into his eyes; he opened the door of the
tower, and called, "Avenant!" Avenant came, creeping feebly along,
fell at the king's knees, and kissed his feet:
"O sire, what have I done that you should treat me so cruelly?"
"You have mocked me and my ambassador; for you said, if I had sent you
to fetch the Fair One with Golden Locks, you would have been
successful and brought her back."
"I did say it, and it was true," replied Avenant fearlessly; "for I
should have told her so much about your majesty and your various high
qualities, which no one knows so well as myself, that I am persuaded
she would have returned with me."
"I believe it," said the king, with an angry look at those who had
spoken ill of his favourite; he then gave Avenant a free pardon, and
took him back with him to the court.
After having supplied the famished youth with as much supper as he
could eat, the king admitted him to a private audience, and said, "I
am as much in love as ever with the Fair One with Golden Locks, so I
will take thee at thy word, and send thee to try and win her for me."
"Very well, please your majesty," replied Avenant cheerfully; "I will
depart to-morrow."
The king, overjoyed with his willingness and hopefulness, would have
furnished him with a still more magnificent equipage and suite than
the first ambassador; but Avenant refused to take anything except a
good horse to ride, and letters of introduction to the princess's
father. The king embraced him and eagerly saw him depart.
It was on a Monday morning when, without any pomp or show, Avenant
thus started on his mission. He rode slowly and meditatively,
pondering over every possible means of persuading the Fair One with
Golden Locks to marry the king; but, even after several days' journey
towards her country, no clear project had entered into his mind. One
morning, when he had started at break of day, he came to a great
meadow with a stream running through it, along which were planted
willows and poplars. It was such a pleasant, rippling stream that he
dismounted and sat down on its banks. There he perceived, gasping on
the grass, a large golden carp, which, in leaping too far after gnats,
had thrown itself quite out of the water, and now lay dying on the
greensward. Avenant took pity on it, and though he was very hungry,
and the fish was very fat, and he would well enough have liked it for
his breakfast, still he lifted it gently and put it back into the
stream. No sooner had the carp touched the fresh cool water than it
revived and swam away; but shortly returning, it spoke to him from the
water in this wise:--
"Avenant, I thank you for your good deed. I was dying, and you have
saved me: I will recompense you for this one day."
After this pretty little speech, the fish popped down to the bottom of
the stream, according to the habit of carp, leaving Avenant very much
astonished, as was natural.
Another day he met with a raven that was in great distress, being
pursued by an eagle, which would have swallowed him up in no time.
"See," thought Avenant, "how the stronger oppress the weaker! What
right has an eagle to eat up a raven?" So taking his bow and arrow,
which he always carried, he shot the eagle dead, and the raven,
delighted, perched in safety on an opposite tree.
"Avenant," screeched he, though not in the sweetest voice in the
world; "you have generously succoured me, a poor miserable raven. I
am not ungrateful, and I will recompense you one day.
"Thank you," said Avenant, and continued his road.
Entering in a thick wood, so dark with the shadows of early morning
that he could scarcely find his way, he heard an owl hooting, like an
owl in great tribulation. She had been caught by the nets spread by
birdcatchers to entrap finches, larks, and other small birds. "What a
pity," thought Avenant, "that men must always torment poor birds and
beasts who have done them no harm!" So he took out his knife, cut the
net, and let the owl go free. She went sailing up into the air, but
immediately returned hovering over his head on her brown wings.
"Avenant," said she, "at daylight the birdcatchers would have been
here, and I should have been caught and killed. I have a grateful
heart; I will recompense you one day."
These were the three principal adventures that befell Avenant on his
way to the kingdom of the Fair One with Golden Locks. Arrived there,
he dressed himself with the greatest care, in a habit of silver
brocade, and a hat adorned with plumes of scarlet and white. He threw
over all a rich mantle, and carried a little basket, in which was a
lovely little dog, an offering of respect to the princess. With this
he presented himself at the palace-gates, where, even though he came
alone, his mien was so dignified and graceful, so altogether charming,
that every one did him reverence, and was eager to run and tell the
Fair One with Golden Locks, that Avenant another ambassador from the
king her suitor, awaited an audience.
"Avenant!" repeated the princess, "That is a pretty name; perhaps the
youth is pretty too."
"So beautiful," said the ladies of honour, "that while he stood under
the palace-window we could do nothing but look at him."
"How silly of you!" sharply said the princess. But she desired them to
bring her robe of blue satin to comb out her long hair, and adorn it
with the freshest garland of flowers; to give her her high-heeled
shoes, and her fan. "Also," added she, "take care that my
audience-chamber is well swept and my throne well dusted. I wish in
everything to appear as becomes the Fair One with Golden Locks."
This done, she seated herself on her throne of ivory and ebony, and
gave orders for her musicians to play, but softly, so as not to
disturb conversation. Thus, shining in all her beauty, she admitted
Avenant to her presence.
He was so dazzled that at first he could not speak: then he began and
delivered his harangue to perfection.
"Gentle Avenant," returned the princess, after listening to all his
reasons for her returning with him, "your arguments are very strong,
and I am inclined to listen to them; but you must first find for me a
ring, which I dropped into the river about a month ago. Until I
recover it, I can listen to no propositions of marriage."
Avenant, surprised and disturbed, made her a profound reverence and
retired, taking with him the basket and the little dog Cabriole, which
she refused to accept. All night long he sat sighing to himself, "How
can I ever find a ring which she dropped into the river a month ago?
She has set me an impossibility."
"My dear master," said Cabriole, "nothing is an impossibility to one
so young and charming as you are: let us go at daybreak to the
river-side."
Avenant patted him, but replied nothing: until, worn out with grief,
he slept. Before dawn Cabriole wakened him, saying, "Master, dress
yourself and let us go to the river."
There Avenant walked up and down, with his arms folded and his head
bent, but saw nothing. At last he heard a voice, calling from a
distance, "Avenant, Avenant!"
The little dog ran to the water-side--"Never believe me again, master,
if it is not a golden carp with a ring in its mouth!"
"Yes, Avenant," said the carp, "this is the ring which the princess
has lost. You saved my life in the willow meadow, and I have
recompensed you. Farewell!"
Avenant took the ring gratefully and returned to the palace with
Cabriole, who scampered about in great glee. Craving an audience, he
presented the princess with her ring, and begged her to accompany him
to his master's kingdom. She took the ring, looked at it, and thought
she was surely dreaming.
"Some fairy must have assisted you, fortunate Avenant," said she.
"Madam, I am only fortunate in my desire to obey your wishes."
"Obey me still," she said graciously. "There is a prince named
Galifron, whose suit I have refused. He is a giant as tall as a tower,
who eats a man as a monkey eats a nut: he puts cannons into his
pockets instead of pistols; and when he speaks, his voice is so loud
that every one near him becomes deaf. Go and fight him, and bring me
Avenant was thunderstruck; but after a time he recovered
himself--"Very well, madam. I shall certainly perish, but I will
perish like a brave man. I will depart at once to fight the Giant
Galifron."
The princess, now in her turn surprised and alarmed, tried every
persuasion to induce him not to go, but in vain. Avenant armed himself
and started, carrying his little dog in its basket. Cabriole was the
only creature that gave him consolation: "Courage, master! While you
attack the giant, I will bite his legs: he will stoop down to strike
me, and then you can knock him on the head." Avenant smiled at the
little dog's spirit, but he knew it was useless.
Arrived at the castle of Galifron, he found the road all strewn with
bones, and carcases of men. Soon he saw the giant walking. His head
was level with the highest trees, and he sang in a terrific voice--
    "Bring me babies to devour;
    More--more--more--more--
    Men and women, tender and tough;
    All the world holds not enough."
To which Avenant replied, imitating the tune--
    "Avenant you here may see,
    He is come to punish thee:
    Be he tender, be he tough,
    To kill thee, giant, he is enough."
Hearing these words, the giant took up his massive club, looked around
for the singer, and, perceiving him, would have slain him on the spot,
had not a raven, sitting on a tree close by, suddenly flown out upon
him and picked out both his eyes. Then Avenant easily killed him and
cut off his head, while the raven, watching him, said--
"You shot the eagle who was pursuing me: I promised to recompense you,
and to-day I have done it. We are quits."
"No, it is I who am your debtor, Sir Raven," replied Avenant, as,
hanging the frightful head to his saddle-bow, he mounted his horse and
rode back to the city of the Fair One with Golden Locks.
There everybody followed him, shouting, "Here is brave Avenant, who
has killed the giant," until the princess, hearing the noise, and
fearing it was Avenant himself who was killed, appeared, all
trembling; and even when he appeared with Galifron's head, she
trembled still, although she had nothing to fear.
"Madam," said Avenant, "your enemy is dead: so I trust you will accept
the hand of the king my master."
"I cannot," replied she thoughtfully, "unless you first bring me a
phial of the water in the Grotto of Darkness. It is six leagues in
length, and guarded at the entrance by two fiery dragons. Within it is
a pit, full of scorpions, lizards, and serpents, and at the bottom of
this place flows the Fountain of Beauty and Health. All who wash in it
become, if ugly, beautiful, and if beautiful, beautiful for ever; if
old, young; and if young, young for ever. Judge then, Avenant, if I
can quit my kingdom without carrying with me some of this miraculous
water."
"Madam," replied Avenant, "you are already so beautiful that you
require it not; but I am an unfortunate ambassador whose death you
desire: I will obey you, though I know I shall never return."
So he departed with his only friends--his horse and his faithful dog
Cabriole; while all who met him looked at him compassionately, pitying
so pretty a youth bound on such a hopeless errand. But, however kindly
they addressed him, Avenant rode on and answered nothing, for he was
too sad at heart.
He reached a mountain-side, where he sat down to rest, leaving his
horse to graze, and Cabriole to run after the flies. He knew that the
Grotto of Darkness was not far off, yet he looked about him like one
who sees nothing. At last he perceived a rock, as black as ink, whence
came a thick smoke; and in a moment appeared one of the two dragons,
breathing out flames. It had a yellow and green body, claws, and a
long tail. When Cabriole saw the monster, the poor little dog hid
himself in terrible fright. But Avenant resolved to die bravely; so,
taking a phial which the princess had given him, he prepared to
descend into the cave.
"Cabriole," said he, "I shall soon be dead: then fill this phial with
my blood, and carry it to the Fair One with Golden Locks, and
afterwards to the king my master, to show him I have been faithful to
the last."
While he was thus speaking, a voice called, "Avenant, Avenant!"--and
he saw an owl sitting on a hollow tree. Said the owl: "You cut the net
in which I was caught, and I vowed to recompense you. Now is the time.
Give me the phial: I know every corner of the Grotto of Darkness--I
will fetch you the water of beauty."
Delighted beyond words, Avenant delivered up his phial; the owl flew
with it into the grotto, and in less than half-an-hour reappeared,
bringing it quite full and well corked. Avenant thanked her with all
his heart, and joyfully took once more the road to the city.
The Fair One with Golden Locks had no more to say. She consented to
accompany him back, with all her suite, to his master's court. On the
way thither, she saw so much of him, and found him so charming, that
Avenant might have married her himself had he chosen; but he would not
have been false to his master for all the beauties under the sun. At
length they arrived at the king's city, and the Fair One with Golden
Locks became his spouse and queen. But she still loved Avenant in her
heart, and often said to the king her lord--"But for Avenant I should
not be here; he has done all sorts of impossible deeds for my sake; he
has fetched me the water of beauty, and I shall never grow old--in
short, I owe him everything."
And she praised him in this sort so much, that at length the king
became jealous; and though Avenant gave him not the slightest cause of
offence, he shut him up in the same high tower once more--but with
irons on his hands and feet, and a cruel jailer besides, who fed him
with bread and water only. His sole companion was his little dog
Cabriole.
When the Fair One with Golden Locks heard of this, she reproached her
husband for his ingratitude, and then, throwing herself at his knees,
implored that Avenant might be set free. But the king only said, "She
loves him!" and refused her prayer. The queen entreated no more, but
fell into a deep melancholy.
When the king saw it, he thought she did not care for him because he
was not handsome enough; and that if he could wash his face with her
water of beauty, it would make her love him more. He knew that she
kept it in a cabinet in her chamber, where she could find it always.
Now it happened that a waiting-maid, in cleaning out this cabinet,
had, the very day before knocked down the phial, which was broken in a
thousand pieces, and all the contents were lost. Very much alarmed,
she then remembered seeing, in a cabinet belonging to the king, a
similar phial. This she fetched, and put in the place of the other
one, in which was the water of beauty. But the king's phial contained
the water of death. It was a poison, used to destroy great
criminals--that is, noblemen, gentlemen, and such like. Instead of
hanging them or cutting their heads off, like common people, they were
compelled to wash their faces with this water; upon which they fell
asleep, and woke no more. So it happened that the king, taking up this
phial, believing it to be the water of beauty, washed his face with
it, fell asleep, and--died.
Cabriole heard the news, and, gliding in and out among the crowd which
clustered round the young and lovely widow, whispered softly to
her--"Madam, do not forget poor Avenant." If she had been disposed to
do so, the sight of his little dog would have been enough to remind
her of him--his many sufferings, and his great fidelity. She rose up,
without speaking to anybody, and went straight to the tower where
Avenant was confined. There, with her own hands, she struck off his
chains, and putting a crown of gold on his head, and a purple mantle
on his shoulders, said to him, "Be king--and my husband."
Avenant could not refuse; for in his heart he had loved her all the
time. He threw himself at her feet, and then took the crown and
sceptre, and ruled her kingdom like a king. All the people were
delighted to have him as their sovereign. The marriage was celebrated
in all imaginable pomp, and Avenant and the Fair One with Golden Locks
lived and reigned happily together all their days.
THE BUTTERFLY.
In the time of the illustrious Merinous, it was indeed a pleasure to
be a king; the laws were just, the people obedient, and peace was over
the land. This monarch would have been the happiest of men, but for
the continual complaints of his consort, which tore his very heart in
twain. She wept continually for her daughters, nineteen of whom had
perished in the flower of youth. The Fairy of the Fountain had
promised a twentieth; but years passed away in fruitless expectation.
"You have neglected to do the fairy sufficient homage," said the king
one day; "I shall give orders to conduct you to the foot of the
mountain with pomp and splendour. But when arrived there the mountain
itself must be climbed on foot, with many fatigues: most women would
rather die childless than encounter them."
"Courage shall not be wanting on my part," said the queen, "and I wish
to set out immediately."
The king kissed her forehead, bade her good-night, and fell asleep.
At early dawn appeared in the grand court of the palace an equipage,
dazzling as the sun itself; the wheels were of massy gold, with
emerald nails, which sparkled in the light. It was drawn by forty-two
horses, white as snow, whose reins were of rose-coloured satin, the
fashion of that period. They snorted impatiently, striking fire from
the pavement beneath their feet; their eyes were inflamed; their bits
covered with foam, and their proud and triumphant air seemed already
to announce the success of the queen's enterprise. Three thousand
chevaliers, armed at all points and mounted on fiery coursers, wheeled
about the chariot, the air resounding with their joyful acclamations
of--"Long live King Merinous and his august spouse!"
The queen saluted the people with the utmost grace and condescension,
which caused such immoderate joy, that she was almost stifled by the
pressure of the crowd: but the guards gently kept them at a distance,
and the procession passed on.
When her majesty had reached the foot of the mountain, she alighted
from her chariot, and, accompanied by only four maids-of-honour,
proceeded on foot.
This mountain was formed of slippery earth, slightly covered over with
green turf, but giving way at every step. The queen's pretty little
white satin shoes were soon left behind; and her feet next stuck so
fast that she could not withdraw them; her fair hands were in the same
plight; she cried aloud for succour, fearing she should be completely
buried alive.
Turning then round to look for her maids-of-honour, she perceived that
they had fallen flat on their faces (the impression remains till this
day), and were struggling, making the most desperate efforts, less in
consideration of their own danger than that of the queen. In fine,
after four hours and a half's patient perseverance they succeeded in
regaining their feet; and strange to say, no mud or clay attached
itself to their clothes; nothing worse than a slight shade of the
green turf, which assumed the appearance of a gauze veil. The fairy
then, seeing the queen willing to overcome difficulties, would not try
her further, but with one stroke of a wand reduced the mountain two or
three hundred feet; the remaining height was very dry and easy of
ascent.
The queen was thus conducted to a delicious grove: a coral fountain
rose in the midst; its waters, of the purest rose-colour, wound along
the meadow, murmuring plaintive airs, whose words were perfectly
distinguishable. The fairy there welcomed her majesty, who prepared to
explain the occasion of her journey; but that was quite unnecessary.
The fairy, exacting profound secrecy, presented her with a phial of
water drawn from the fountain, strictly ordering that it should be
broken when she had drank it all. The queen, charmed by this
reception, made presents of inestimable value, and rejoined her
maids-of-honour, who had been thrown into an enchanted sleep. They
then returned to the palace in such high spirits, that all the court
danced and sung for a month afterwards.
In due course her majesty became, for the twentieth time, a joyful
The magnificence and liberality displayed on this occasion exceed
belief. The royal palace was surrounded by three hundred large spouts
which poured forth alternately, night and day the choicest sweetmeats,
confectionery, and money; the streets, in fact, were filled--the
passengers had only to stoop down and be satisfied.
But in the midst of these festivities the Fairy of the Fountain,
uncovering the little princess's cradle, which was of mother-o'-pearl
studded with diamonds, perceived a beautiful butterfly, placed
immediately under the infant's left eye.
The chief cradle-rocker, who dreaded being taxed with negligence, took
a humming-bird's wing, and endeavoured to chase it away, but all in
vain: it remained quite unconcerned in the same spot, extending its
large wings of rose-colour and azure-blue on the face of the princess,
appearing rather to caress than to wish to do her any injury. "Ah!"
said the fairy, "this butterfly is not what you imagine. It is a
powerful fairy, who presides at the birth of the most distinguished
princesses, and endows them with a degree of levity which generally
leads to misfortune. I can lessen the evil, without doubt, but I
cannot entirely avert it." The queen wept bitterly at this sad news,
and the king saw no person during eight days. He then ceased to think
on the subject.
Misfortunes rarely enter into the speculations of kings. Masters of
the destinies of others, mankind flatter them into a belief that their
power can almost control fate itself. Accordingly, the visit of the
butterfly did not produce much permanent inquietude. The
poets-laureate and literati of the court turned it into numerous
sentimental conceits; amongst others, that the insect had fastened on
the princess's cheek mistaking it for a rose. This idea branched out
into a hundred elegies, a thousand madrigals, and fifteen hundred
songs, which were sung in all the principal families, and adapted to
airs, some already known, and others composed for the occasion.
The fairy frequently visited her little charge, but was unable to
conquer her fickle disposition. Ten different nurses had already been
obliged to give her up; she scratched them, bit them, and obstinately
refused to be fed. When she grew older, and began her education, she
was so easily wearied and vexed, that no one dared to contradict her.
The fairy was consulted; who made her smell at a very rare flower.
This produced a degree of intelligence so extraordinary, that in three
days she could read, write, speak all languages, and play on every
instrument after just twenty-three minutes' application.
The queen was now delighted, for the princess's talents were noised
abroad equally with her beauty. She had scarcely attained the age of
fourteen when many kings sought the honour of her hand. The good King
Merinous was well stricken in years, and fondly desired to see
Papillette established. All who seemed worthy of her received a
favourable reception, and amongst this number was the accomplished
Prince Favourite. After he had been presented in due form, the old
monarch asked his daughter what she thought of their new guest.
"Sire," replied the maiden, "I have been brought up with too much
modesty and reserve to bestow attention on strangers of the other
sex."
"That is true," returned the monarch; "but merely regarding him as a
picture, how has he appeared to you?"
"Tall and handsome," answered Papillette, "his chestnut hair clinging
in close and crisping curls to his ivory brow; his eyes of
violet-blue, filled with soft vivacity; his teeth, of the most
brilliant white, divide lips of coral; his nose is perfect Grecian,
and his limbs like the rarest statuary. I might say more, had I
ventured to look at the prince."
"It is enough," said the king; "your first glance has shown you
enough. I am delighted that you are so sensible to the merits of
Prince Favourite, as I design him for your husband. Love him
accordingly."
"Your majesty's commands are laws to your dutiful daughter," replied
Papillette.
One may easily imagine with what magnificence preparations were made
for the nuptials; the king hastened them, lest his daughter's
fickleness and levity might cause disappointment to their dearest
hopes.
Papillette one day, while steadily regarding her lover, who was
kneeling before her, appeared struck by something which made an
impression as sudden as disagreeable. She repulsed Prince Favourite,
saying she was seized with a headache, and could not be troubled with
company.
The lover submissively arose and went to seek the queen, beseeching
her to find out what he had done, and to intercede in his favour. Her
majesty accordingly questioned the princess, who, bathed in tears,
threw herself into the arms of her mother, confessing that she had
made a discovery which totally altered her sentiments regarding the
prince. "Is it possible," added she, "that you have not perceived his
ears, of so unusual a size, and a deep red colour?"
"Is that all?" cried the queen. "In truth, I have not observed it; but
to take notice of an imperfection so very trifling, would make us
appear ridiculous indeed."
"People cannot help their feelings," replied Papillette; "I have quite
a horror of red ears; it is little worth while to be daughter of a
great king, if one must be crossed and thwarted in the most important
arrangement of life."
The queen reasoned long; but this only increased Papillette's
resistance: therefore, being quite defenceless against the tears of a
child so dear, her majesty promised to speak to the king.
Merinous was firm in all his resolutions; he therefore declared, that
his daughter should become the wife of Prince Favourite, whether she
liked it or not.
The queen had not courage to impart this dreadful intelligence; but
she threw herself on the generosity of the prince, beseeching that he
would himself break the engagement--thus shielding Papillette from the
resentment of the king.
The distracted lover was ready to die with grief: but promised to do
all she requested. He asked but three days' grace.
The queen consented; and Prince Favourite then summoned Queséca, chief
barber to the king, "Barber," said he, "each country has its
particular prejudices--its own ideas of beauty; here I find large ears
are deemed a deformity; therefore, I command thee to cut off mine."
"I cannot do it," replied the barber; "your royal highness has been
grossly deceived. I have the honour of shaving the first lords of the
court, and I know many of them whose ears are equally red and ten
times as long as those of your royal highness. These very lords are
amongst the most distinguished favourites of the king."
"I have summoned thee," replied the prince, "to operate and not to
prate; obey my orders, and inflame not my ears still further by thy
discourse."
"Alas!" said the barber, "since your royal highness means to sacrifice
them to an unreasonable caprice, what signifies it whether they are
inflamed or not?"
At these words the prince made a threatening gesture; and Queséca, no
longer daring to resist, took his razor, and with a trembling hand
separated two of the handsomest ears from one of the finest heads in
the world: for be it known, that the princess only made a pretext of
this assertion, because she had taken a fancy for somebody else.
The wound bled profusely: the prince applied healing balm; and when in
a condition to appear before her, enclosed his two ears in a little
box, rare and precious, and presented it to Papillette, his heart once
more filled with hope and love.
The princess eagerly opened the beautiful little casket, then dashed
it with horror to the ground. "Prince!" she cried, "what can have
induced you to mutilate yourself so cruelly? Could you imagine that I
would ever wed a man who submitted to lose his ears?"
"Madam," said the prince, in consternation, "it was by my own order
that--"
"What a fool you were then!" cried Papillette. "If you are not willing
to become the ridicule of the court, I advise you to quit it with the
greatest expedition imaginable."
The prince dared not call her cruel and ungrateful: he retired to the
thickest retreats of a forest, and soon after entirely lost his
reason.
The princess, once more free, confessed that amongst her numerous
suitors there was one whom she preferred; this was Prince Malabar,
whose martial mien announced the soul of a hero. The queen did not
deny that Malabar had sought her daughter's hand, even before
Favourite aspired to that honour, and King Merinous could now no
longer insist on a marriage with this unfortunate prince, since he was
quite insane, ran naked through the woods, sometimes believing himself
a hind, sometimes a wolf, and never stopping until exhausted by grief
and despair. But in consenting to the marriage of his daughter with
Prince Malabar, the king declared that, should she again change her
mind, he would never forgive her.
The happy day was once more fixed, and Papillette, three days
preceding, invited her lover to meet her in a delightful grove at the
extremity of the gardens. This grove was planted with myrtles, so
thick and high that they afforded a pleasant shade. Beautiful flowers
sprang up on all sides; and, added to the warblings of the birds in
the trees, were the voices of hidden musicians, singing a chorus,
composed by the princess herself. This, however, Malabar, who was a
soldier, and not a musician, and who naturally wished to have his
lady-love's society all to himself, did not sufficiently appreciate.
"Princess," said he, "I had much rather hear you talk than these
people sing."
"Are then those cares despised," replied Papillette, "which I have so
assiduously employed to amuse and gratify you by the display of my
talents?"
"Your dearest talent," cried he, "is that of pleasing: it comprises
every other. Send away these people, I pray." He added in a tone of
the utmost irritation: "I hate--I detest music!"
"Have I rightly heard?" exclaimed the princess angrily; "and do you
pretend to love, if your soul is insensible to such transporting
sounds?"
"I wish they would transport themselves far enough away," returned
the lover, who, like most other lovers, could be in an ill humour
sometimes. "My princess, do order this scraping and squalling to
cease."
"On the contrary, I order my musicians to remain," answered
Papillette, quite indignant, "and never, never will I unite myself to
him whom divine melody hath no power to move. Go, prince, barbarous
alike in taste and science, seek some rustic maid, best suited to your
insensibility."
The musicians, too far distant to hear these words, struck up a lively
tune. Malabar imagined this done in derision, and it required all his
respect for the princess to prevent him from falling on them sword in
hand. He repented much his words, but considered it beneath his
dignity to retract them; the princess also refused to retract hers: so
they parted.
Malabar resolved on instant death. Mounting the noblest courser in his
stable, he rode down to the sea-coast, and plunged him right over a
perpendicular cliff into the waters below.
The tide happened to be coming in, so that the body was soon washed on
shore, and brought before the eyes of the cruel princess, laid on a
litter formed of willow, hung with draperies of black crape.
She was standing at the window when the melancholy procession passed,
and inquired what it was. None dared answer; they only removed the
covering from the face of the corpse. She ottered a loud shriek, and
fainted away.
The king and queen lavished on her the most tender cares, but all in
vain: she declared that she regarded herself as an inconsolable widow,
and insisted upon putting on the deepest weeds.
King Merinous respected this caprice, and ordered twenty thousand
yards of crape for her use. She was just giving orders to have her
apartments festooned with it, and holding a cambric handkerchief to
her eyes, when a little green ape (a drawing-room favourite) dressed
itself in weepers, and disposed one of the widow's caps most
tastefully under its chin.
At this sight the princess burst out laughing so loudly and heartily,
that all the court ladies, who had been trying which could pull the
longest and most sympathetic countenance, were greatly relieved, and
began immediately to smile a little.
Gradually, they removed from her eyes the trappings of woe, and
substituted ribbons of rose-colour and blue of every shade and
variety: trying on these, so diverted Papillette's melancholy, that
the poor drowned prince was soon forgotten. Her tears indeed were
vain; he had already enough of water.
The king was in despair. "Alas!" said he to the queen, "we shall never
have the consolation of marrying Papillette, or beholding our
grandchildren. Of two monarchs so worthy of her, one has lost his
reason, the other has cast himself into the sea; and while we continue
to weep, she, already consoled, thinks only of diverting herself!"
"Sire," replied the queen, "calm your apprehensions. Our daughter is
yet too young to feel true love in all its fervour; let us have
patience, and seek alliance with none but those truly worthy of her
affections."
"Such is my wish," replied the king, "and I begin to turn my views
upon Prince Patipata; he has seen the portrait of Papillette, and is
satisfied; but, though a wise and noble monarch, his personal
qualifications are little in his favor."
"How so!" rejoined the queen.
"Because he is stiff, tall, and spare; his eyes bleared and filmy; his
hair red, and so scanty withal, that it seems like a few stripes of
blasted flax hung around a distaff."
A few days after this conversation, Prince Patipata arrived at court;
and the queen did not conceal from Papillette, that, notwithstanding
his personal disadvantages, he was intended for her spouse.
The princess laughed immoderately, yet, just for amusement, she
displayed towards him all the arts and graces of coquetry to
perfection.
Prince Patipata having been informed of the deplorable end of his
predecessors, concealed his love as carefully as the others had
proclaimed theirs. He was so reserved and cold, that the princess
longed exceedingly to discover the state of his feelings. Accordingly,
one day, while Patipata was walking with Salmoé, his intimate
confidant, she hid herself in the trunk of an old tree, which had been
hollowed out by lightning, and afforded apparently a secure retreat.
The prince seated himself at the foot of it, but he had observed the
princess; and, making a sign of intelligence to his companion, feigned
to continue a conversation of which she was the subject. "Assuredly,"
said he, "the princess is very handsome; but flatterers, poets, and
painters always overstep the truth. Her portrait has deceived me: its
large blue eyes bear assuredly some resemblance to those of
Papillette, but they bespeak an ardent and feeling heart, while hers
is frivolous, volatile, and incapable of love. Her smile would be
charming, but for its satirical irony. And what is the value of the
loveliest lips in the world, if they open but to deceive and betray!"
"I am much surprised," replied Salmoé; "I believed that your royal
highness was equally loving and beloved."
"Far from it," returned Patipata; "it would ill become me, plain as I
am, to be confident of pleasing; and I am not dupe enough to yield my
heart without return. Do not you approve of this?"
"No," answered Salmoé, "your royal highness is too modest; I cannot
sufficiently appreciate your humility."
The prince affected to be dissatisfied with this praise, and then
moved onwards in order to liberate Papillette, who was very
inconveniently cramped, and almost suffocated with anger. Disagreeable
truths seldom reach the ear of princesses; her resentment, therefore,
was to be expected. Meanwhile, her heart being equally capricious as
her understanding, she felt ready to pardon, and even, on reflection,
to justify Patipata. But pride soon combated this weakness; and she
determined to send him away. She complained to her father; assured
him, that by mere chance she had heard the most odious calumnies
uttered by a prince who sported with their dignity, by falsely
pretending to the hand of her whom he slighted and despised. The king
was surprised; but, not having entered into any positive engagements
with Patipata, he readily entered into her feelings, and intimated to
the prince that his adieus would be well received. This Patipata
expected; but, although not naturally presumptuous, he had read
sufficiently into the heart of Papillette to feel some degree of
consolation.
As no decisive explanation of any kind occurred, he was permitted to
take leave of the princess. This he did with much firmness; while she
appeared so much agitated, that it was remarked by all the court. The
men attributed this to hatred; but the ladies, who knew better,
pronounced it love. They were convinced of the fact, when day by day
she began to pine and refused to eat; and had not the chief cook every
day invented some new ragout, she would inevitably have died of
hunger.
The queen was in despair, and dispatched a billet to the Fairy of the
Fountain, fastening it to the tail of a little white mouse, which
served as a messenger on this occasion; it was perfectly acquainted
with the way, and in a few minutes the fairy arrived at the palace.
The late events were mentioned to her, and the melancholy situation of
the princess.
"I understand this case," said the fairy; "but it is necessary that
Papillette should give me her confidence."
The fairy was so amiable and so much beloved by the princess, that she
easily yielded; and casting down her eyes, confessed that she loved
one who regarded her with contemptuous indifference; and what rendered
her choice still more degrading was, its object being equally ugly as
insensible.
"I am then to understand," replied the fairy, "that you wish to be
cured of this unfortunate passion?"
"Alas, no!" rejoined Papillette, "for my only pleasure is in thinking
of him, speaking to him as if he could hear, and persuading myself
that, notwithstanding appearances, he could have loved me, had he
believed my heart capable of steady affections. I shall therefore die,
leaving him alike ignorant of my regrets and my repentance."
"I would not advise you to die," said the fairy "that is the only evil
in the world without a remedy. But, my dear Papillette, what can I do
to console you?"
"Let me see the prince once more, under some metamorphose in which it
is impossible for him to recognise me."
"Very well," replied the fairy. "But since you wish to risk it, and
that a simple butterfly can scarcely compromise her dignity in
following a king, under this form I shall transport you to his court."
So saying, the Fairy of the Fountain placed on her finger a little
emerald ring, and the princess distinctly felt her arms change their
shape--expand--become flexible, and form two light wings, clothed in
the most brilliant colours. Her little feet quitted the earth, and as
the window was open, she flew out, traversing the air, with a degree
of rapidity which at first caused some sensations of fear. But soon
the eager desire of seeing Patipata urged her forward, although
natural instinct so far prevailed, as to cause frequent descents to
earth, where she rested on every tempting flower.
At length, entering the prince's gardens, she beheld him walking on a
terrace watering a beautiful orange-tree. Her heart beat so violently,
that her first emotion was to hide, but, soon recovering
self-possession, she flew forwards and rested on a branch which he had
just gathered.
"What a charming butterfly!" observed the king to his chief gardener.
"Its colours are truly exquisite; I never recollect having seen any
such before."
"Some new species, come to do mischief, I suppose," said the gardener,
preparing to brush it rudely away. But it took refuge on the bosom of
the king, with such caressing and tender familiarity, that only a hard
heart could have done it injury.
"Ah, little traitor!" cried Patipata, "thou wishest to win me by thy
fleeting charms, and then escape for ever. I already know too well the
pain of loving fickle beings such as thou. Yet still I must defend
thee, and permit thy return to my orange-tree as often as thou
desirest."
Papillette easily penetrated the thoughts of the prince, and although
they uttered a reproach for her inconstancy, she fancied they also
breathed the language of love; and returned in better spirits than
usual to her father's palace, where her absence had been unobserved.
From thenceforward she never omitted making use of the emerald ring,
which transported her in a few moments to her royal lover: she
followed him to his palace, saw him give audiences, preside in
council, and everywhere prove himself just, great, generous, and
worthy of all her affection. It is true that his eyes were still
filmy, his body spare, and his hair as red as ever; but what signifies
an outside casket when containing a priceless jewel within?
Patipata was determined against marriage; he therefore adopted as heir
to the crown the son of a cousin, a young orphan, whom he purposed
bringing up beneath his own eye. This prince little resembled his
uncle: he had been much spoiled in infancy, and it was impossible to
improve him. One day, while conversing with Patipata, "Sire," said he,
"I have a favour to ask your majesty, and I pray you not to refuse
"I shall willingly grant you anything reasonable," replied the king.
"It is but your beautiful rose-coloured butterfly, which follows you
everywhere."
"And if I were to give it to you, what then?"
"I would run this golden pin through its body, and stick it to a
branch of the orange-tree, to see how long it would live. Oh, nothing
could be more amusing!"
"Nothing could be more barbarous!" answered Patipata indignantly. "Go,
you inspire me with horror; I banish you from my presence during three
entire days, and remember, that if my butterfly should receive any
injury, you shall be punished with unexampled severity!"
The poor butterfly, who had heard this discourse, knew not how to
express its gratitude and joy; it flapped its wings, and sported
around its benefactor. The king held out his finger, and it rested
there. "Thou shalt quit me no more," said he. "It is so sweet to be
loved, even by a butterfly, that I would not willingly prove myself
ungrateful: thou shalt feed at my table; I will serve thee with the
finest fruits, the fairest flowers. Ah! if I can only make thee
happy!"
On the following day, Patipata went out hunting. In vain Papillette
sought him in the park, in the garden, and near the favourite
orange-tree. But his nephew, taking advantage of his absence, began
chasing the pretty butterfly. The courtiers knew that he would one day
be in power, and, eager to gratify his whims, assisted in the wanton
sport: ministers the most pompous, members of council the most
profound, climbed on trees, and capered through the meadows,--one
would have supposed them mad. But the royal insect, so familiar with
the king, was for all others the most capricious of butterflies. It
amused itself in leading the court a long chase, and at length rested
in the private cabinet of the king, where they never once thought of
seeking it.
Papillette, now all alone, could not resist the opportunity afforded
of looking over a great quantity of writing which lay on the bureau.
What was her surprise and joy, on there finding verses, the most
passionate and tender, which Patipata had written in her praise! They
indeed revealed that he was proud, and would not risk a second
refusal; but they vowed to remain faithful to her, and never to wed
The princess was so affected, that two little tiny tears stood in her
butterfly-eyes. Well indeed she might shed them, for at this moment,
the wicked little prince, her enemy, came behind, and seizing her by
her two lovely wings, popped her into his hat.
"Now I have you!" cried he; and it is impossible to say what would
have happened, had not the king opportunely returned; when, in taking
off his hat to his uncle, he let the butterfly go.
She, recovering from her fright, testified affection by many little
endearments; and Patipata, now accustomed to speak to her, exclaimed:
"Beautiful insect, how happy art thou!--thou wanderest from flower to
flower, without giving the preference to any--thou knowest not
love--thou hast not found ingratitude! I, a king, can not boast of
such happiness. I adore the lovely Princess Papillette, and am
dismissed from her court. I am ugly, it is true; but were I ever so
handsome, I should not be more fortunate, for I too well know her
fickle--"
The butterfly here sighed so deeply, that the king started.
"Is it possible thou canst feel?" said he. "Oh, if my princess had but
as much sensibility, I would know no other care! With her I would live
in a hut, far, far from the deceitful splendour of a throne."
"The Princess Papillette would willingly accompany you," said a little
voice, in tones of the finest and purest melody: and the butterfly's
rosy wings blushed deep as crimson.
"What a prodigy!" cried Patipata. "Ah! butterfly, what dost thou know
of my Papillette?"
"Suppose it were herself!" said a voice, which seemed to proceed from
a little fountain of rock-crystal which stood between the windows.
The prince turned round; but instead of the butterfly, he beheld the
Fairy of the Fountain, holding the fair Papillette by the hand. They
were both encircled by a light rose-coloured cloud, which shed a
softly brilliant light around the apartment.
Patipata bent one knee to the earth, and kissed the hem of the
princess's garment.
"Come, prince," said the fairy, "King Merinous is apprised of what
passes here. Papillette has overcome her evil destiny. Her affections
are fixed and sure; and their object is yourself And however ready
you may both be to live in a hut together, I advise you not to do it.
Love is sweeter than royalty, no doubt, but it is not impossible to
unite both."
The lovers, transported with joy, placed their feet on the
rose-colored cloud, which instantly carried them to the palace of the
king. The Fairy of the Fountain, to complete her benefactions,
rendered Patipata as handsome as he was amiable, and the nuptials were
celebrated with suitable pomp and festivity. We are informed that
Papillette had, at first, some slight returns of her natural
disposition; but in one year she became a mother, and from
thenceforward never knew frivolity more.
THE FROG-PRINCE.
In times of yore, when wishes were both heard and granted, lived a
king whose daughters were all beautiful, but the youngest was so
lovely that the sun himself, who has seen so much, wondered at her
beauty every time he looked in her face. Now, near the king's castle
was a large dark forest; and in the forest, under an old linden-tree,
was a deep well. When the day was very hot, the king's daughter used
to go to the wood and seat herself at the edge of the cool well; and
when she became wearied, she would take a golden ball, throw it up in
the air, and catch it again. This was her favourite amusement. Once it
happened that her golden ball, instead of falling back into the little
hand that she stretched out for it, dropped on the ground, and
immediately rolled away into the water. The king's daughter followed
it with her eyes, but the ball had vanished, and the well was so deep
that no one could see down to the bottom. Then she began to weep, wept
louder and louder every minute, and could not console herself at all.
While she was thus lamenting some one called to her: "What is the
matter with you, king's daughter? You weep so, that you would touch
the heart of a stone."
She looked around to see whence the voice came, and saw a frog
stretching his thick ugly head out of the water.
"Ah! it is you, old water-paddler!" said she. "I am crying for my
golden ball, which has fallen into the well."
"Be content," answered the frog, "I daresay I can give you some good
advice; but what will you give me if I bring back your plaything to
"Whatever you like, dear frog," said she, "my clothes, my pearls and
jewels, even the golden crown I wear."
The frog answered, "Your clothes, your pearls and jewels, even your
golden crown, I do not care for; but if you will love me, and let me
be your companion and playfellow; sit near you at your little table,
eat from your little golden plate, drink from your little cup, and
sleep in your little bed;--if you will promise me this, then I will
bring you back your golden ball from the bottom of the well."
"Oh, yes!" said she; "I promise you everything, if you will only bring
me back my golden ball."
She thought to herself, meanwhile: "What nonsense the silly frog
talks! He sits in the water with the other frogs, and croaks, and can
not be anybody's playfellow!"
But the frog, as soon as he had received the promise, dipped his head
under the water and sank down. In a little while up he came again with
the ball in his mouth, and threw it on the grass. The king's daughter
was overjoyed when she beheld her pretty plaything again, picked it
up, and ran away with it.
"Wait! wait!" cried the frog; "take me with you. I cannot run as fast
as you."
Alas! of what use was it that he croaked after her as loud as he
could. She would not listen to him, but hastened home, and soon forgot
the poor frog, who was obliged to plunge again to the bottom of his
The next day, when she was sitting at dinner with the king and all the
courtiers, eating from her little gold plate, there came a sound of
something creeping up the marble staircase--splish, splash; and when
it had reached the top, it knocked at the door and cried, "Youngest
king's daughter, open to me."
She ran, wishing to see who was outside; but when she opened the door,
and there sat the frog, she flung it hastily to again, and sat down at
table, feeling very, very uncomfortable. The king saw that her heart
was beating violently, and said, "How, my child, why are you afraid?
Is a giant standing outside the door to carry you off?"
"Oh, no!" answered she, "it is no giant, but a nasty frog, who
yesterday, when I was playing in the wood near the well, fetched my
golden ball out of the water. For this I promised him he should be my
companion, but I never thought he could come out of his well. Now he
is at the door, and wants to come in."
Again, the second time there was a knock, and a voice cried:
    "Youngest king's daughter,
      Open to me;
    Know you what yesterday
      You promised me,
    By the cool water?
    Youngest king's daughter
      Open to me."
Then said the king, "What you promised you must perform. Go and open
the door."
She went and opened the door; the frog hopped in, always following and
following her till he came up to her chair. There he sat and cried
out, "Lift me up to you on the table."
She refused, till the king, her father, commanded her to do it. When
the frog was on the table, he said, "Now push your little golden plate
nearer to me, that we may eat together." She did as he desired, but
one could easily see that she did it unwillingly. The frog seemed to
enjoy his dinner very much, but every morsel she ate stuck in the
throat of the poor little princess.
Then said the frog, "I have eaten enough, and am tired; carry me to
your little room, and make your little silken bed smooth, and we will
lay ourselves down to sleep together."
At this the daughter of the king began to weep; for she was afraid of
the cold frog, who wanted to sleep in her pretty clean bed.
But the king looked angrily at her, and said again: "What you have
promised you must perform. The frog is your companion."
It was no use to complain whether she liked it or not; she was obliged
to take the frog with her up to her little bed. So she picked him up
with two fingers, hating him bitterly the while, and carried him
upstairs: but when she got into bed, instead of lifting him up to her,
she threw him with all her strength against the wall, saying, "Now,
you nasty frog, there will be an end of you."
But what fell down from the wall was not a dead frog, but a living
young prince, with beautiful and loving eyes, who at once became, by
her own promise and her father's will, her dear companion and husband.
He told her how he had been cursed by a wicked sorceress, and that no
one but the king's youngest daughter could release him from his
enchantment and take him out of the well.
The next day a carriage drove up to the palace-gates with eight white
horses, having white feathers on their heads and golden reins. Behind
it stood the servant of the young prince, called the Faithful Henry.
This faithful Henry had been so grieved when his master was changed
into a frog, that he had been compelled to have three iron bands
fastened round his heart, lest it should break. Now the carriage came
to convey the prince to his kingdom, so the faithful Henry lifted in
the bride and bridegroom, and mounted behind, full of joy at his
lord's release. But when they had gone a short distance, the prince
heard behind him a noise as if something was breaking. He turned
round, and cried out, "Henry, the carriage is breaking!"
But Henry replied: "No, sir, it is not the carriage, but one of the
bands from my heart, with which I was forced to bind it up, or it
would have broken with grief, while you sat as a frog at the bottom of
the well."
Twice again this happened, and the prince always thought the carriage
was breaking; but it was only the bands breaking off from the heart of
the faithful Henry, out of joy that his lord the Frog-Prince was a
frog no more.
THE WHITE CAT.
There was once a king who had three sons, all handsome, brave and
noble of heart. Nevertheless, some wicked courtiers made their father
believe they were eager to wear his crown, which, though he was old,
he had no mind to resign. He therefore invented a plan to get them out
of the kingdom, and prevent their carrying out any undutiful projects.
Sending for them to a private audience, he conversed with them kindly,
and said: "You must be sensible, my dear children, that my great age
prevents me from attending so closely as I have hitherto done to state
affairs. I fear this may be injurious to my subjects; I therefore
desire to place my crown on the head of one of you; but it is no more
than just that, in return for such a present, you should procure me
some amusement in my retirement, before I leave the capital for ever.
I cannot help thinking that a little dog, handsome, faithful, and
engaging, would be the very thing to make me happy; so that, without
bestowing a preference on either of you, I declare that he who brings
me the most perfect little dog shall be my successor."
The princes were much surprised at the fancy of their father to have a
little dog, yet they accepted the proposition with pleasure; and
accordingly, after taking leave of the king, who presented them with
abundance of money and jewels, and appointed that day twelvemonth for
their return, they set off on their travels.
Before separating, however, they took some refreshment together, in an
old palace about three miles out of town, where they mutually agreed
to meet in the same place on that day twelvemonth, and go all together
with their presents to court. They also agreed to change their names,
and travel incognito.
Each took a different road; but it is intended to relate the
adventures of only the youngest, who was the most beautiful, amiable,
and accomplished prince in the world. As he travelled from town to
town, he bought all the handsome dogs that fell in his way; and as
soon as he saw one that was handsomer than those he had, he made a
present of the rest; for twenty servants would scarcely have been
sufficient to take care of all the dogs he was continually purchasing.
At length, wandering he knew not whither, he found himself in a
forest; night suddenly came on, and with it a violent storm of
thunder, lightning, and rain: to add to his perplexity, he lost his
way. After he had groped about for a long time, he perceived a light,
which made him suppose that he was not far from some house: he
accordingly pursued his way towards it, and in a short time found
himself at the gates of the most magnificent palace he had ever
beheld. The entrance-door was of gold, covered with sapphires, which
shone so that scarcely could the strongest eyesight bear to look at
it: this was the light the prince had seen from the forest. The walls
were of transparent porcelain, variously coloured, and represented the
history of all the fairies that had existed from the beginning of the
world. The prince, coming back to the golden door, observed a deer's
foot fastened to a chain of diamonds; he could not help wondering at
the magnificence he beheld, and the security in which the inhabitants
seemed to live; "For," said he to himself, "nothing could be easier
than for thieves to steal this chain, and as many of the
sapphire-stones as would make their fortunes." He pulled the chain,
and heard a bell, the sound of which was exquisite. In a few moments
the door was opened; yet he perceived nothing but twelve hands in the
air, each holding a torch. The prince was so astonished that he durst
not move a step--when he felt himself gently pushed on by some other
hands from behind him. He walked on, in great perplexity, till he
entered a vestibule inlaid with porphyry and lapis-stone, where the
most melodious voice he had ever heard chanted the following words:--
    "Welcome, prince, no danger fear,
    Mirth and love attend you here;
    You shall break the magic spell,
    That on a beauteous lady fell.
    Welcome, prince, no danger fear,
    Mirth and love attend you here."
The prince now advanced with confidence, wondering what these words
could mean; the hands moved him forward towards a large door of
coral, which opened of itself to give him admittance into a splendid
apartment built of mother-o'-pearl, through which he passed into
others, so richly adorned with paintings and jewels, and so
resplendently lighted with thousands of lamps, girandoles, and
lustres, that he imagined he must be in an enchanted palace. When he
had passed through sixty apartments, all equally splendid, he was
stopped by the hands, and a large easy chair advanced of itself
towards the fireplace; then the hands, which he observed were
extremely white and delicate, took off his wet clothes, and supplied
their place with the finest linen imaginable, adding a comfortable
wrapping-gown, embroidered with gold and pearls.
The hands next brought him an elegant dressing-table, and combed his
hair so very gently that he scarcely felt their touch. They held
before him a beautiful basin, filled with perfumes, for him to wash
his face and hands, and afterwards took off the wrapping-gown, and
dressed him in a suit of clothes of still greater splendour. When his
toilet was complete, they conducted him to an apartment he had not yet
seen, and which also was magnificently furnished. There was a table
spread for supper, and everything upon it was of the purest gold,
adorned with jewels. The prince observed there were two covers set,
and was wondering who was to be his companion, when his attention was
suddenly caught by a small figure not a foot high, which just then
entered the room, and advanced towards him. It had on a long black
veil, and was supported by two cats dressed in mourning and with
swords by their sides: they were followed by a numerous retinue of
cats, some carrying cages full of rats, and others mouse-traps full of
mice.
The prince was at a loss what to think. The little figure now
approached, and throwing aside her veil, he beheld a most beautiful
white cat: she seemed young and melancholy; and, addressing herself to
him, she said, "My prince, you are welcome; your presence affords me
the greatest pleasure."
"Madam," replied he, "I would fain thank you for your generosity, nor
can I help observing that you must be an extraordinary creature to
possess, with your present form, the gift of speech, and the most
magnificent palace I have ever seen."
"All this is very true," answered the beautiful cat; "but, prince, I
am not fond of talking, and least of all do I like compliments; let us
therefore sit down to supper."
The trunkless hands then placed the dishes on the table, and the
prince and white cat seated themselves at it. The first dish was a pie
made of young pigeons, and the next was a fricassee of the fattest
mice. The view of the one made the prince almost afraid to taste the
other, till the white cat, who guessed his thoughts, assured him that
there were certain dishes at table which had been dressed on purpose
for him, in which there was not a morsel of either rat or mouse:
accordingly, he ate heartily of such as she recommended. When supper
was over, he perceived that the white cat had a portrait set in gold
hanging to one of her feet. He begged her permission to look at it;
when, to his astonishment, he saw the portrait of a handsome young
man, who exactly resembled himself! He thought there was something
most extraordinary in all this: yet, as the white cat sighed and
looked very sorrowful, he did not venture to ask any questions. He
conversed with her on different subjects, and found her extremely well
versed in everything that was passing in the world. When night was far
advanced, his hostess wished him a good night, and he was conducted by
the hands to his bedchamber, which was different still from anything
he had seen in the palace, being hung with the wings of butterflies
mixed with the most curious feathers. His bed was of gauze, festooned
with bunches of the gayest ribands, and the looking-glasses reached
from the floor to the ceiling. The prince was undressed and put into
bed by the hands, without speaking a word. He, however, slept little,
and in the morning was awakened by a confused noise. The hands took
him out of bed, and put on him a handsome hunting-jacket. He looked
into the courtyard, and perceived more than five hundred cats, busily
employed in preparing for the field--for this was a day of festival.
Presently the white cat came to his apartment; and having politely
inquired after his health, she invited him to partake of their
amusement. The prince willingly acceded, and mounted a wooden horse,
richly caparisoned, which had been prepared for him, and which he was
assured would gallop to admiration. The beautiful white cat mounted a
monkey; she wore a dragoon's cap, which made her look so fierce that
all the rats and mice ran away in the utmost terror.
Everything being ready, the horns sounded, and away they went: no
hunting was ever more agreeable. The cats ran faster than the hares
and rabbits; and when they caught any, they turned them out to be
hunted in the presence of the white cat, and a thousand cunning tricks
were played. Nor were the birds in safety; for the monkey made nothing
of climbing up the trees, with the white cat on his back, to the nests
of the young eagles. When the chase was over, the whole retinue
returned to the palace; the white cat immediately exchanged her
dragoon's cap for the veil, and sat down to supper with the prince,
who, being very hungry, ate heartily, and afterwards partook with her
of the most delicious wines. He then was conducted to his chamber as
before, and wakened in the morning to renew the same sort of life,
which day after day became so pleasant to him that he no longer
thought of anything but of pleasing the sweet little creature who
received him so courteously: accordingly, every day was spent in new
amusements. The prince had almost forgotten his country and relations,
and sometimes even regretted that he was not a cat, so great was his
affection for his mewing companions.
"Alas!" said he to the white cat, "how will it afflict me to leave
you, whom I love so much! Either make yourself a lady, or make me a
cat." She smiled at the prince's wish, but offered no reply.
At length, the twelvemonth was nearly expired: the white cat, who knew
the very day when the prince was to reach his father's palace,
reminded him that he had but three days longer to look for a perfect
little dog. The prince, astonished at his own forgetfulness, began to
afflict himself; when the cat told him not to be so sorrowful, since
she would not only provide him with a little dog, but also with a
wooden horse, which should convey him safely home in less than twelve
hours.
"Look here," said she, showing him an acorn, "this contains what you
desire."
The prince put the acorn to his ear, and heard the barking of a little
dog. Transported with joy, he thanked the cat a thousand times; and
the next day, bidding her tenderly adieu, he set out on his return.
The prince arrived first at the place of rendezvous, and was soon
joined by his brothers: they mutually embraced, and began to give an
account of their success; when the youngest showed them only a little
mongrel cur, telling them that he thought it could not fail to please
the king, from its extraordinary beauty. The brothers trod on each
other's toes under the table, as much as to say, "We have little to
fear from this sorry-looking animal." The next day they went together
to the palace. The dogs of the two elder brothers were lying on
cushions, and so curiously wrapped around with embroidered quilts,
that one would scarcely venture to touch them. The youngest produced
his cur, and all wondered how the prince could hope to receive a crown
for such a shabby present. The king examined the two little dogs of
the elder princes, and declared he thought them so equally beautiful
that he knew not to which, with justice, he could give the preference.
They accordingly began to dispute; when the youngest prince, taking
his acorn from his pocket, soon ended their contention; for a little
dog appeared, which could with ease go through the smallest ring, and
was besides a miracle of beauty. The king could not possibly hesitate
in declaring his satisfaction; yet, as he was not more inclined than
the year before to part with his crown, he told his sons that he was
extremely obliged to them for the pains they had taken: and since they
had succeeded so well, he wished they would make a second attempt; he
therefore begged they would take another year in order to procure a
piece of cambric, fine enough to be drawn through the eye of a small
needle.
The three princes thought this very hard; yet they set out, in
obedience to the king's command. The two eldest took different roads,
and the youngest remounted his wooden horse, and in a short time
arrived at the palace of his beloved white cat, who received him with
the greatest joy, while the trunkless hands helped him to dismount,
and provided him with immediate refreshment. Afterwards the prince
gave the white cat an account of the admiration which had been
bestowed on the beautiful little dog, and informed her of the further
injunction of his father.
"Make yourself perfectly easy, dear prince," said she; "I have in my
palace some cats who are perfect adepts in making such cambric as the
king requires; so you have nothing to do but to give me the pleasure
of your company while it is making, and I will procure you all the
amusement possible."
She accordingly ordered the most curious fire-works to be played off
in sight of the window of the apartment in which they were sitting;
and nothing but festivity and rejoicing was heard throughout the
palace for the prince's return. As the white cat frequently gave
proofs of an excellent understanding, the prince was by no means tired
of her company; she talked with him of state affairs, of theatres, of
fashions: in short, she was at a loss on no subject whatever; so that
when the prince was alone, he had plenty of amusement in thinking how
it could possibly be, that a small white cat could be endowed with all
the attractions of the very best and most charming of women.
The twelvemonth in this manner again passed insensibly away; but the
cat took care to remind the prince of his duty in proper time. "For
once, my prince," said she, "I will have the pleasure of equipping you
as suits your high rank." And, looking into the courtyard, he saw a
superb car, ornamented all over with gold, silver, pearls, and
diamonds, drawn by twelve horses as white as snow, and harnessed in
the most sumptuous trappings; and behind the car a thousand guards,
richly apparelled, were waiting to attend on the prince's person. She
then presented him with a nut: "You will find in it," said she, "the
piece of cambric I promised you: do not break the shell till you are
in the presence of the king your father." Then, to prevent the
acknowledgments which the prince was about to offer, she hastily bade
him adieu.
Nothing could exceed the speed with which the snow-white horses
conveyed this fortunate prince to his father's palace, where his
brothers had just arrived before him. They embraced each other, and
demanded an immediate audience of the king, who received them with the
greatest of kindness. The princes hastened to place at the feet of his
majesty the curious present he had required them to procure. The
eldest produced a piece of cambric so extremely fine, that his friends
had no doubt of its passing through the eye of a needle, which was now
delivered to the king, having been kept locked up in the custody of
his majesty's treasurer all the time. But when the king tried to draw
the cambric through the eye of the needle, it would not pass, though
it failed but very little. Then came the second prince, who made as
sure of obtaining the crown as his brother had done, but, alas! with
no better success; for though his piece of cambric was exquisitely
fine, yet it could not be drawn through the eye of the needle. It was
now the turn of the youngest prince, who accordingly advanced, and
opening an elegant little box inlaid with jewels, took out a walnut
and cracked the shell, imagining he should immediately perceive his
piece of cambric; but what was his astonishment to see nothing but a
filbert! He did not, however, lose his hopes; he cracked the filbert,
and it presented him with a cherry-stone. The lords of the court, who
had assembled to witness this extraordinary trial, could not, any more
than the princes his brothers, refrain from laughing, to think he
should be so silly as to claim the crown on no better pretensions. The
prince, however, cracked the cherry-stone, which was filled with a
kernel; he divided it, and found in the middle a grain of wheat, and
in that a grain of millet-seed. He was now absolutely confounded, and
could not help muttering between his teeth, "O white cat, white cat,
thou hast deceived me!" At this instant he felt his hand scratched by
the claw of a cat; upon which he again took courage, and opening the
grain of millet-seed, to the astonishment of all present, he drew
forth a piece of cambric four hundred yards long, and fine enough to
be threaded with perfect ease through the eye of the needle.
When the king found he had no pretext left for refusing the crown to
his youngest son, he sighed deeply, and it was easy to be seen that he
was sorry for the prince's success.
"My sons," said he, "it is so gratifying to the heart of a father to
receive proofs of his children's love and obedience, that I cannot
refuse myself the satisfaction of requiring of you one thing more.
You must undertake another expedition. That one of you, who, by the
end of a year, brings me the most beautiful lady, shall marry her and
obtain my crown."
So they again took leave of the king and of each other, and set out
without delay; and in less than twelve hours, our young prince
arrived, in his splendid car, at the palace of his dear white cat.
Everything went on as before till the end of another year. At length
only one day remained of the year, when the white cat thus addressed
him: "To-morrow, my prince, you must present yourself at the palace of
your father, and give him a proof of your obedience. It depends only
on yourself to conduct thither the most beautiful princess ever yet
beheld, for the time is come when the enchantment by which I am bound
may be ended. You must cut off my head and tail," continued she, "and
throw them into the fire."
"I!" said the prince, hastily--"I cut off your head and tail! You
surely mean to try my affection, which, believe me, beautiful cat, is
truly yours."
"You mistake me, generous prince," said she; "I do not doubt your
regard; but if you wish to see me in any other form than that of a
cat, you must consent to do as I desire, when you will have done me a
service I shall never be able sufficiently to repay."
The prince's eyes filled with tears as she spoke, yet he considered
himself obliged to undertake the dreadful task; and the cat
continuing to press him with the greatest eagerness, with a trembling
hand he drew his sword, cut off her head and tail, and threw them into
the fire. No sooner was this done, than the most beautiful lady his
eyes had ever seen stood before him: and ere he had sufficiently
recovered from his surprise to speak to her, a long train of
attendants, who, at the same moment as their mistress, were changed to
their natural shapes, came to offer their congratulations to the
queen, and inquire her commands. She received them with the greatest
kindness, and ordering them to withdraw, thus addressed the astonished
prince:
"Do not imagine, dear prince, that I have always been a cat, or that I
am of obscure birth. My father was the monarch of six kingdoms; he
tenderly loved my mother, and left her always at liberty to follow her
own inclinations. Her prevailing passion was to travel; and a short
time before my birth, having heard of some fairies who were in
possession of the largest gardens filled with the most delicious
fruits, she had so strong a desire to eat some of them, that she set
out for the country where they lived. She arrived at their abode,
which she found to be a magnificent palace, on all sides glittering
with gold and precious stones. She knocked a long time at the gates;
but no one came, nor could she perceive the least sign that it had any
inhabitant. The difficulty, however, did but increase the violence of
my mother's longing; for she saw the tops of the trees above the
garden-walls, loaded with the most luscious fruits. The queen, in
despair, ordered her attendants to place tents close to the door of
the palace; but, having waited six weeks without seeing any one pass
the gates, she fell sick of vexation, and her life was despaired of.
"One night, as she lay half asleep, she turned herself about, and,
opening her eyes, perceived a little old woman, very ugly and
deformed, seated in the easy-chair by her bedside. 'I and my sister
fairies,' said she, 'take it very ill that your majesty should so
obstinately persist in getting some of our fruit; but since so
precious a life is at stake, we consent to give you as much as you can
carry away, provided you will give us in return what we shall ask.'
'Ah! kind fairy,' cried the queen, 'I will give you anything that I
possess, even my very kingdoms, on condition that I eat of your
fruit.' The old fairy then informed the queen that what they required
was, that she should give them the child she was going to have, as
soon as it should be born; adding, that every possible care should be
taken of it, and that it should become the most accomplished princess.
The queen replied that, however cruel the conditions, she must accept
them, since nothing but the fruit could save her life. In short, dear
prince," continued the lady, "my mother instantly got out of bed, was
dressed by her attendants, entered the palace, and satisfied her
longing. Having eaten her fill, she ordered four thousand mules to be
procured and loaded with the fruit, which had the virtue of continuing
all the year round in a state of perfection. Thus provided, she
returned to the king my father, who, with the whole court, received
her with rejoicings, as it was before imagined she would die of
disappointment. All this time the queen said nothing to my father of
the promise she had made to give her daughter to the fairies; so that
when the time was come that she expected my birth, she grew very
melancholy; till at length, being pressed by the king, she declared to
him the truth. Nothing could exceed his affliction when he heard that
his only child, when born, was to be given to the fairies. He bore it,
however, as well as he could, for fear of adding to my mother's grief;
and also believing he should find some means of keeping me in a place
of safety, which the fairies would not be able to approach. As soon,
therefore, as I was born, he had me conveyed to a tower in the palace,
to which there were twenty flights of stairs, and a door to each, of
which my father kept the key, so that none came near me without his
consent. When the fairies heard of what had been done, they sent first
to demand me; and on my father's refusal, they let loose a monstrous
dragon, which devoured men, women, and children, and which, by the
breath of its nostrils, destroyed everything it came near, so that
even the trees and plants began to die. The grief of the king was
excessive; and, finding that his whole kingdom would in a short time
be reduced to famine, he consented to give me into their hands. I was
accordingly laid in a cradle of mother-o'-pearl, ornamented with gold
and jewels, and carried to their palace, when the dragon immediately
disappeared. The fairies placed me in a tower, elegantly furnished,
but to which there was no door, so that whoever approached was obliged
to come by the windows, which were a great height from the ground:
from these I had the liberty of getting out into a delightful garden,
in which were baths, and every sort of cooling fruit. In this place
was I educated by the fairies, who behaved to me with the greatest
kindness; my clothes were splendid, and I was instructed in every kind
of accomplishment; in short, prince, if I had never seen anyone but
themselves, I should have remained very happy. One day, however, as I
was talking at the window with my parrot, I perceived a young
gentleman who was listening to our conversation. As I had never seen a
man but in pictures, I was not sorry for the opportunity of gratifying
my curiosity. I thought him a very pleasing object, and he at length
bowed in the most respectful manner, without daring to speak, for he
knew that I was in the palace of the fairies. When it began to grow
dark, he went away, and I vainly endeavoured to see which road he
took. The next morning, as soon as it was light, I again placed myself
at the window, and had the pleasure of seeing that the gentleman had
returned to the same place. He now spoke to me through a
speaking-trumpet, and informed me he thought me a most charming lady,
and that he should be very unhappy if he did not pass his life in my
"I resolved to find some means of escaping from my tower, and was not
long in devising the means for the execution of my project: I begged
the fairies to bring me a netting-needle, a mesh, and some cord,
saying I wished to make some nets to amuse myself with catching birds
at my window. This they readily complied with, and in a short time I
completed a ladder long enough to reach to the ground. I now sent my
parrot to the prince, to beg he would come to the usual place, as I
wished to speak with him. He did not fail; and finding the ladder,
mounted it, and quickly entered my tower. This at first alarmed me,
but the charms of his conversation had restored me to tranquillity,
when all at once the window opened, and the Fairy Violent, mounted on
the dragon's back, rushed into the tower. My beloved prince thought of
nothing but how to defend me from their fury; for I had had time to
relate to him my story, previous to this cruel interruption; but their
numbers overpowered him, and the Fairy Violent had the barbarity to
command the dragon to devour my lover before my eyes. In my despair, I
would have thrown myself also into the mouth of the horrible monster;
but this they took care to prevent, saying, my life should be
preserved for greater punishment. The fairy then touched me with her
wand, and I instantly became a white cat. She next conducted me to
this palace, which belonged to my father, and gave me a train of cats
for my attendants, together with the twelve hands that waited on your
highness. She then informed me of my birth and the death of my
parents, and pronounced upon me what she imagined the greatest of
maledictions; that I should not be restored to my natural figure until
a young prince, the perfect resemblance of him I had lost, should cut
off my head and tail. You are that perfect resemblance; and
accordingly you ended the enchantment. I need not add, that I already
love you more than my life; let us therefore hasten to the palace of
the king your father, and obtain his approbation to our marriage."
The prince and princess accordingly set out side by side, in a car of
still greater splendour than before, and reached the palace just as
the two brothers had arrived with two beautiful princesses. The king,
hearing that each of his sons had succeeded in finding what he had
required, again began to think of some new expedient to delay the time
of his resigning the crown; but when the whole court were with the
king assembled to pass judgment, the princess who accompanied the
youngest, perceiving his thoughts by his countenance, stepped
majestically forward and thus addressed him:
"It is a pity that your majesty, who is so capable of governing,
should think of resigning the crown! I am fortunate enough to have six
kingdoms in my possession; permit me to bestow one on each of the
eldest princes, and to enjoy the remaining four in the society of the
youngest. And may it please your majesty to keep your own kingdom, and
make no decision concerning the beauty of three princesses, who,
without such a proof of your majesty's preference, will no doubt live
happily together!"
The air resounded with the applauses of the assembly: the young prince
and princess embraced the king, and next their brothers and sisters:
the three weddings immediately took place, and the kingdoms were
divided as the princess had proposed.
PRINCE CHERRY
Long ago there lived a monarch, who was such a very honest man that
his subjects entitled him the Good King. One day, when he was out
hunting, a little white rabbit, which had been half killed by his
hounds, leaped right into his majesty's arms. Said he, caressing it:
"This poor creature has put itself under my protection, and I will
allow no one to injure it." So he carried it to his palace, had
prepared for it a neat little rabbit-hutch, with abundance of the
daintiest food, such as rabbits love, and there he left it.
The same night, when he was alone in his chamber, there appeared to
him a beautiful lady. She was dressed neither in gold, nor silver, nor
brocade; but her flowing robes were white as snow, and she wore a
garland of white roses on her head. The Good King was greatly
astonished at the sight; for his door was locked, and he wondered how
so dazzling a lady could possibly enter; but she soon removed his
doubts.
"I am the Fairy Candide," said she, with a smiling and gracious air.
"Passing through the wood, where you were hunting, I took a desire to
know if you were as good as men say you are. I therefore changed
myself into a white rabbit, and took refuge in your arms. You saved
me, and now I know that those who are merciful to dumb beasts will be
ten times more so to human beings. You merit the name your subjects
give you: you are the Good King. I thank you for your protection, and
shall be always one of your best friends. You have but to say what you
most desire, and I promise you your wish shall be granted."
"Madam," replied the king, "if you are a fairy, you must know, without
my telling you, the wish of my heart. I have one well-beloved son,
Prince Cherry: whatever kindly feeling you have towards me, extend it
to him."
"Willingly," said Candide. "I will make him the handsomest, richest,
or most powerful prince in the world: choose whichever you desire for
him."
"None of the three," returned the father. "I only wish him to be
good--the best prince in the whole world. Of what use would riches,
power, or beauty be to him if he were a bad man?"
"You are right," said the fairy; "but I cannot make him good: he must
do that himself. I can only change his external fortunes; for his
personal character, the utmost I can promise is to give him good
counsel, reprove him for his faults, and even punish him, if he will
not punish himself. You mortals can do the same with your children."
"Ah, yes!" said the king, sighing. Still, he felt that the kindness of
a fairy was something gained for his son, and died not long after,
content and at peace.
Prince Cherry mourned deeply, for he dearly loved his father, and
would have gladly given all his kingdoms and treasures to keep him in
life a little longer. Two days after the Good King was no more, Prince
Cherry was sleeping in his chamber, when he saw the same dazzling
vision of the Fairy Candide.
"I promised your father," said she, "to be your best friend, and in
pledge of this take what I now give you;" and she placed a small gold
ring upon his finger. "Poor as it looks, it is more precious than
diamonds; for whenever you do ill it will prick your finger. If, after
that warning, you still continue in evil, you will lose my friendship,
and I shall become your direst enemy."
So saying, she disappeared, leaving Cherry in such amazement, that he
would have believed it all a dream, save for the ring on his finger.
He was for a long time so good that the ring never pricked him at all;
and this made him so cheerful and pleasant in his humour that
everybody called him, "Happy Prince Cherry." But, one unlucky day, he
was out hunting and found no sport, which vexed him so much that he
showed his ill temper by his looks and ways. He fancied his ring felt
very tight and uncomfortable, but as it did not prick him, he took no
heed of this: until, re-entering his palace, his little pet dog, Bibi,
jumped up upon him, and was sharply told to get away. The creature,
accustomed to nothing but caresses, tried to attract his attention by
pulling at his garments, when Prince Cherry turned and gave it a
severe kick. At this moment he felt in his finger a prick like a pin.
"What nonsense!" said he to himself. "The fairy must be making game of
me. Why, what great evil have I done! I, the master of a great empire,
cannot I kick my own dog?"
A voice replied, or else Prince Cherry imagined it, "No, sire; the
master of a great empire has a right to do good, but not evil. I--a
fairy--am as much above you as you are above your dog. I might punish
you, kill you, if I chose; but I prefer leaving you to amend your
ways. You have been guilty of three faults to-day--bad temper,
passion, cruelty: do better to-morrow."
The prince promised, and kept his word awhile; but he had been brought
up by a foolish nurse, who indulged him in every way, and was always
telling him that he would be a king one day, when he might do as he
liked in all things. He found out now that even a king cannot always
do that; it vexed him, and made him angry. His ring began to prick him
so often that his little finger was continually bleeding. He disliked
this, as was natural; and soon began to consider whether it would not
be easier to throw the ring away altogether than to be constantly
annoyed by it. It was such a queer thing for a king to have always a
spot of blood on his finger! At last, unable to put up with it any
more, he took his ring off, and hid it where he would never see it;
and believed himself the happiest of men, for he could now do exactly
what he liked. He did it, and became every day more and more
miserable.
One day he saw a young girl, so beautiful that, being always
accustomed to have his own way, he immediately determined to espouse
her. He never doubted that she would be only too glad to be made a
queen, for she was very poor. But Zelia--that was her name--answered,
to his great astonishment, that she would rather not marry him.
"Do I displease you?" asked the prince, into whose mind it had never
entered that he could displease anybody.
"Not at all, my prince," said the honest peasant-maiden. "You are very
handsome, very charming; but you are not like your father the Good
King. I will not be your queen, for you would make me miserable."
At these words the prince's love seemed all to turn to hatred: he gave
orders to his guards to convey Zelia to a prison near the palace; and
then took counsel with his foster brother, the one of all his ill
companions who most incited him to do wrong.
"Sir," said this man, "if I were in your majesty's place, I would
never vex myself about a poor silly girl. Feed her on bread and water
till she comes to her senses; and if she still refuses you, let her
die in torment, as a warning to your other subjects should they
venture to dispute your will. You will be disgraced should you suffer
yourself to be conquered by a simple girl."
"But," said Prince Cherry, "shall I not be disgraced if I harm a
creature so perfectly innocent?"
"No one is innocent who disputes your majesty's authority," said the
courtier, bowing; "and it is better to commit an injustice than allow
it to be supposed you can ever be contradicted with impunity."
This touched Cherry on his weak point--his good impulses faded; he
resolved once more to ask Zelia if she would marry him, and, if she
again refused, to sell her as a slave. Arrived at the cell in which
she was confined, what was his astonishment to find her gone! He knew
not who to accuse, for he had kept the key in his pocket the whole
time. At last, the foster-brother suggested that the escape of Zelia
might have been contrived by an old man, Suliman by name, the prince's
former tutor, who was the only one who now ventured to blame him for
anything that he did. Cherry sent immediately, and ordered his old
friend to be brought to him, loaded heavily with irons. Then, full of
fury, he went and shut himself up in his own chamber, where he went
raging to and fro, till startled by a noise like a clap of thunder.
The Fairy Candide stood before him.
"Prince," said she, in a severe voice, "I promised your father to give
you good counsels, and to punish you if you refused to follow them. My
counsels were forgotten, my punishments despised. Under the figure of
a man, you have been no better than the beasts you chase: like a lion
in fury a wolf in gluttony, a serpent in revenge, and a bull in
brutality. Take, therefore, in your new form the likeness of all these
animals."
Scarcely had Prince Cherry heard these words, than to his horror he
found himself transformed into what the fairy had named. He was a
creature with the head of a lion, the horns of a bull the feet of a
wolf, and the tail of a serpent. At the same time he felt himself
transported to a distant forest, where, standing on the bank of a
stream, he saw reflected in the water his own frightful shape, and
heard a voice saying:
"Look at thyself, and know thy soul has become a thousand times uglier
even than thy body."
Cherry recognised the voice of Candide, and in his rage would have
sprung upon her and devoured her; but he saw nothing, and the same
voice said behind him:
"Cease thy feeble fury, and learn to conquer thy pride by being in
submission to thine own subjects."
Hearing no more, he soon quitted the stream, hoping at least to get
rid of the sight of himself; but he had scarcely gone twenty paces
when he tumbled into a pitfall that was laid to catch bears; the
bear-hunters, descending from some trees hard by, caught him, chained
him, and, only too delighted to get hold of such a curious-looking
animal, led him along with them to the capital of his own kingdom.
There great rejoicings were taking place, and the bear-hunters, asking
what it was all about, were told that it was because Prince Cherry,
the torment of his subjects, had just been struck dead by a
thunderbolt--just punishment of all his crimes. Four courtiers, his
wicked companions, had wished to divide his throne between them; but
the people had risen up against them, and offered the crown to
Suliman, the old tutor whom Cherry had ordered to be arrested.
All this the poor monster heard. He even saw Suliman sitting upon his
own throne, and trying to calm the populace by representing to them
that it was not certain Prince Cherry was dead, that he might return
one day to re-assume with honour the crown which Suliman only
consented to wear as a sort of viceroy.
"I know his heart," said the honest and faithful old man; "it is
tainted, but not corrupt. If alive, he may reform yet, and be all his
father over again to you, his people, whom he has caused to suffer so
much."
These words touched the poor beast so deeply, that he ceased to beat
himself against the iron bars of the cage in which the hunters carried
him about, became gentle as a lamb, and suffered himself to be taken
quietly to a menagerie, where were kept all sorts of strange and
ferocious animals--a place which he had himself often visited as a
boy, but never thought he should be shut up there himself.
However, he owned he had deserved it all, and began to make amends by
showing himself very obedient to his keeper. This man was almost as
great a brute as the animals he had charge of, and when he was in ill
humour he used to beat them without rhyme or reason. One day, while he
was sleeping, a tiger broke loose, and leaped upon him, eager to
devour him. Cherry at first felt a thrill of pleasure at the thought
of being revenged; then, seeing how helpless the man was, he wished
himself free, that he might defend him. Immediately the doors of his
cage opened. The keeper, waking up, saw the strange beast leap out,
and imagined, of course, that he was going to be slain at once.
Instead, he saw the tiger lying dead, and the strange beast creeping
up, and laying itself at his feet to be caressed. But as he lifted up
his hand to stroke it, a voice was heard saying, "Good actions never
go unrewarded;" and, instead of the frightful monster, there crouched
on the ground nothing but a pretty little dog.
Cherry, delighted to find himself thus metamorphosed, caressed the
keeper in every possible way, till at last the man took him up into
his arms and carried him to the king, to whom he related this
wonderful story, from beginning to end. The queen wished to have the
charming little dog; and Cherry would have been exceedingly happy,
could he have forgotten that he was originally a man and a king. He
was lodged most elegantly, had the richest of collars to adorn his
neck, and heard himself praised continually. But his beauty rather
brought him into trouble, for the queen, afraid lest he might grow too
large for a pet, took advice of dog-doctors, who ordered that he
should be fed entirely upon bread, and that very sparingly; so poor
Cherry was sometimes nearly starved.
One day, when they gave him his crust for breakfast, a fancy seized
him to go and eat it in the palace-garden; so he took the bread in his
mouth, and trotted away towards a stream which he knew, and where he
sometimes stopped to drink. But instead of the stream he saw a
splendid palace, glittering with gold and precious stones. Entering
the doors was a crowd of men and women, magnificently dressed; and
within there was singing and dancing, and good cheer of all sorts.
Yet, however grandly and gaily the people went in, Cherry noticed that
those who came out were pale, thin, ragged, half-naked, covered with
wounds and sores. Some of them dropped dead at once; others dragged
themselves on a little way and then lay down, dying of hunger, and
vainly begged a morsel of bread from others who were entering in--who
never took the least notice of them.
Cherry perceived one woman, who was trying feebly to gather and eat
some green herbs. "Poor thing!" said he to himself; "I know what it is
to be hungry, and I want my breakfast badly enough; but still it will
not kill me to wait till dinner-time, and my crust may save the life
of this poor woman."
So the little dog ran up to her, and dropped his bread at her feet;
she picked it up, and ate it with avidity. Soon she looked quite
recovered, and Cherry, delighted, was trotting back again to his
kennel, when he heard loud cries, and saw a young girl dragged by
four men to the door of the palace, which they were trying to compel
her to enter. Oh, how he wished himself a monster again, as when he
slew the tiger!--for the young girl was no other than his beloved
Zelia. Alas! what could a poor little dog do to defend her? But he ran
forward and barked at the men, and bit their heels, until at last they
chased him away with heavy blows. And then he lay down outside the
palace-door, determined to watch and see what had become of Zelia.
Conscience pricked him now. "What!" thought he, "I am furious against
these wicked men, who are carrying her away; and did I not do the same
myself? Did I not cast her into prison, and intend to sell her as a
slave? Who knows how much more wickedness I might not have done to her
and others, if heaven's justice had not stopped me in time?"
While he lay thinking and repenting, he heard a window open, and saw
Zelia throw out of it a bit of dainty meat. Cherry, who felt hungry
enough by this time, was just about to eat it, when the woman to whom
he had given his crust snatched him up in her arms.
"Poor little beast!" cried she, patting him, "every bit of food in
that palace is poisoned: you shall not touch a morsel."
And at the same time the voice in the air repeated again, "Good
actions never go unrewarded;" and Cherry found himself changed into a
beautiful little white pigeon. He remembered with joy that white was
the colour of the Fairy Candide, and began to hope that she was
taking him into favour again.
So he stretched his wings, delighted that he might now have a chance
of approaching his fair Zelia. He flew up to the palace-windows, and,
finding one of them open, entered and sought everywhere, but he could
not find Zelia. Then, in despair, he flew out again, resolved to go
over the world until he beheld her once more.
He took flight at once, and traversed many countries, swiftly as a
bird can, but found no trace of his beloved. At length in a desert,
sitting beside an old hermit in his cave, and partaking with him his
frugal repast, Cherry saw a poor peasant-girl, and recognised Zelia.
Transported with joy, he flew in, perched on her shoulder, and
expressed his delight and affection by a thousand caresses.
She, charmed with the pretty little pigeon, caressed it in her turn,
and promised it that, if it would stay with her, she would love it
always.
"What have you done, Zelia?" said the hermit, smiling; and while he
spoke the white pigeon vanished, and there stood Prince Cherry in his
own natural form. "Your enchantment ended, prince, when Zelia promised
to love you. Indeed, she has loved you always, but your many faults
constrained her to hide her love. These are now amended, and you may
both live happy if you will, because your union is founded upon mutual
esteem."
Cherry and Zelia threw themselves at the feet of the hermit, whose
form also began to change His soiled garments became of dazzling
whiteness, and his long beard and withered face grew into the flowing
hair and lovely countenance of the Fairy Candide.
"Rise up, my children," said she; "I must now transport you to your
palace, and restore to Prince Cherry his father's crown, of which he
is now worthy."
She had scarcely ceased speaking when they found themselves in the
chamber of Suliman, who, delighted to find again his beloved pupil and
master, willingly resigned the throne, and became the most faithful of
his subjects.
King Cherry and Queen Zelia reigned together for many years, and it is
said that the former was so blameless and strict in all his duties,
that though he constantly wore the ring which Candide had restored to
him, it never once pricked his finger enough to make it bleed.
LITTLE SNOWDROP.
Once upon a time, in the middle of winter, when the flakes of snow
fell like feathers from the sky, a queen sat at a window set in an
ebony frame, and sewed. While she was sewing and watching the snow
fall, she pricked her finger with her needle, and three drops of blood
dropped on the snow. And because the crimson looked so beautiful on
the white snow, she thought, "Oh that I had a child as white as snow,
as red as blood, and as black as the wood of this ebony frame!"
Soon afterwards she had a little daughter, who was as white as snow,
as red as blood, and had hair as black as ebony. And when the child
was born, the queen died.
After a year had gone by, the king took another wife. She was a
handsome lady, but proud and haughty, and could not endure that any
one should surpass her in beauty. She had a wonderful mirror, and
whenever she walked up to it, and looked at herself in it, she said:
    "Little glass upon the wall,
    Who is fairest among us all?"
Then the mirror replied:
    "Lady queen, so grand and tall,
    Thou art the fairest of them all."
And she was satisfied, for she knew the mirror always told the truth.
But Snowdrop grew ever taller and fairer, and at seven years old was
beautiful as the day, and more beautiful than the queen herself. So
once, when the queen asked of her mirror:
it answered:
    "Lady queen, you are grand and tall,
    But Snowdrop is fairest of you all."
Then the queen was startled, and turned yellow and green with envy.
From that hour she so hated Snowdrop, that she burned with secret
wrath whenever she saw the maiden. Pride and envy grew apace like
weeds in her heart, till she had no rest day or night. So she called a
huntsman and said, "Take the child out in the forest, for I will
endure her no longer in my sight. Kill her, and bring me her lungs and
liver as tokens that you have done it."
The huntsman obeyed, and led the child away; but when he had drawn his
hunting-knife, and was about to pierce Snowdrop's innocent heart, she
began to weep, and said, "Ah! dear huntsman, spare my life, and I will
run deep into the wild forest, and never more come home."
The huntsman took pity on her, because she looked so lovely, and said,
"Run away then, poor child!"--"The wild beasts will soon make an end
of thee," he thought; but it seemed as if a stone had been rolled from
his heart, because he had avoided taking her life; and as a little
bear came by just then, he killed it, took out its liver and lungs,
and carried them as tokens to the queen. She made the cook dress them
with salt, and then the wicked woman ate them, and thought she had
eaten Snowdrop's lungs and liver. The poor child was now all alone in
the great forest, and she felt frightened as she looked at all the
leafy trees, and knew not what to do. So she began to run, and ran
over the sharp stones, and through the thorns; and the wild beasts
passed close to her, but did her no harm. She ran as long as her feet
could carry her, and when evening closed in, she saw a little house,
and went into it to rest herself. Everything in the house was very
small, but I cannot tell you how pretty and clean it was.
There stood a little table, covered with a white tablecloth, on which
were seven little plates (each little plate with its own little
spoon)--also seven little knives and forks, and seven little cups.
Round the walls stood seven little beds close together, with sheets as
white as snow. Snowdrop being so hungry and thirsty, ate a little of
the vegetables and bread on each plate, and drank a drop of wine from
every cup, for she did not like to empty one entirely.
Then, being very tired, she laid herself down in one of the beds, but
could not make herself comfortable, for one was too long, and another
too short. The seventh, luckily, was just right; so there she stayed,
said her prayers, and fell asleep.
When it was grown quite dark, home came the masters of the house,
seven dwarfs, who delved and mined for iron among the mountains. They
lighted their seven candles, and as soon as there was a light in the
kitchen, they saw that some one had been there, for it was not quite
so orderly as they had left it.
The first said, "Who has been sitting on my stool?"
The second, "Who has eaten off my plate?"
The third, "Who has taken part of my loaf?"
The fourth, "Who has touched my vegetables?"
The fifth, "Who has used my fork?"
The sixth, "Who has cut with my knife?"
The seventh, "Who has drunk out of my little cup?"
Then the first dwarf looked about, and saw that there was a slight
hollow in his bed, so he asked, "Who has been lying in my little bed?"
The others came running, and each called out, "Some one has also been
lying in my bed."
But the seventh, when he looked in his bed, saw Snowdrop there, fast
asleep. He called the others, who flocked round with cries of
surprise, fetched their seven candles, and cast the light on Snowdrop.
"Oh, heaven!" they cried, "what a lovely child!" and were so pleased
that they would not wake her, but let her sleep on in the little bed.
The seventh dwarf slept with all his companions in turn, an hour with
each, and so they spent the night. When it was morning, Snowdrop woke
up, and was frightened when she saw the seven dwarfs. They were very
friendly, however, and inquired her name.
"Snowdrop," answered she.
"How have you found your way to our house?" further asked the dwarfs.
So she told them how her stepmother had tried to kill her, how the
huntsman had spared her life, and how she had run the whole day
through, till at last she had found their little house.
Then the dwarfs said, "If thou wilt keep our house, cook, make the
beds, wash, sew and knit, and make all neat and clean, thou canst stay
with us, and shalt want for nothing."
"I will, right willingly," said Snowdrop. So she dwelt with them, and
kept their house in order. Every morning they went out among the
mountains, to seek iron and gold, and came home ready for supper in
the evening.
The maiden being left alone all day long, the good dwarfs warned her,
saying, "Beware of thy wicked stepmother, who will soon find out that
thou art here; take care that thou lettest nobody in."
The queen, however, after having, as she thought, eaten Snowdrop's
lungs and liver, had no doubt that she was again the first and fairest
woman in the world; so she walked up to her mirror, and said:
The mirror replied:
    Here, you are fairest of them all:
    But over the hills, with the seven dwarfs old,
    Lives Snowdrop, fairer a hundredfold."
She trembled, knowing the mirror never told a falsehood; she felt sure
that the huntsman had deceived her, and that Snowdrop was still alive.
She pondered once more, late and early, early and late, how best to
kill Snowdrop; for envy gave her no rest, day or night, while she
herself was not the fairest lady in the land. When she had planned
what to do, she painted her face, dressed herself like an old
pedlar-woman, and altered her appearance so much, that no one could
have known her. In this disguise she went over the seven hills, to
where the seven dwarfs dwelt, knocked at the door, and cried, "Good
wares, cheap! very cheap!"
Snowdrop looked out of the window and cried, "Good morning, good
woman: what have you to sell?"
"Good wares, smart wares," answered the queen--"bodice laces of all
colours;" and drew out one which was woven of coloured silk.
"I may surely let this honest dame in!" thought Snowdrop; so she
unfastened the door, and bought for herself the pretty lace.
"Child," said the old woman, "what a figure thou art! Let me lace thee
for once properly." Snowdrop feared no harm, so stepped in front of
her, and allowed her bodice to be fastened up with the new lace.
But the old woman laced so quick and laced so tight, that Snowdrop's
breath was stopped, and she fell down as if dead. "Now I am fairest at
last," said the old woman to herself, and sped away.
The seven dwarfs came home soon after, at eventide, but how alarmed
were they to find their poor Snowdrop lifeless on the ground! They
lifted her up, and, seeing that she was laced too tightly, cut the
lace of her bodice; she began to breathe faintly, and slowly returned
to life. When the dwarfs heard what had happened, they said, "The old
pedlar-woman was none other than the wicked queen. Be careful of
thyself, and open the door to no one if we are not at home."
The cruel stepmother walked up to her mirror when she reached home,
To which it answered, as usual:
    Here, you are fairest of them all;
When she heard this, she was so alarmed that all the blood rushed to
her heart, for she saw plainly that Snowdrop was still alive.
"This time," said she, "I will think of some means that shall destroy
her utterly;" and with the help of witchcraft, in which she was
skilful, she made a poisoned comb. Then she changed her dress and took
the shape of another old woman.
Again she crossed the seven hills to the home of the seven dwarfs,
knocked at the door, and cried, "Good wares, very cheap!"
Snowdrop looked out and said, "Go away--I dare let no one in."
"You may surely be allowed to look!" answered the old woman, and she
drew out the poisoned comb and held it up. The girl was so pleased
with it that she let herself be cajoled, and opened the door.
When the bargain was struck, the dame said, "Now let me dress your
hair properly for once." Poor Snowdrop took no heed, and let the old
woman begin; but the comb had scarcely touched her hair before the
poison worked, and she fell down senseless.
"Paragon of beauty!" said the wicked woman, "all is over with thee
now," and went away.
Luckily, it was near evening, and the seven dwarfs soon came home.
When they found Snowdrop lifeless on the ground, they at once
distrusted her stepmother. They searched, and found the poisoned comb;
and as soon as they had drawn it out, Snowdrop came to herself, and
told them what had happened. Again they warned her to be careful, and
open the door to no one.
The queen placed herself before the mirror at home and said:
But it again answered:
    Here you are fairest of them all;
    Lives Snowdrop, fairer a thousandfold."
When she heard the mirror speak thus, she quivered with rage.
"Snowdrop shall die," she cried, "if it costs my own life!"
Then she went to a secret and lonely chamber, where no one ever
disturbed her, and compounded an apple of deadly poison. Ripe and rosy
cheeked, it was so beautiful to look upon, that all who saw it longed
for it; but it brought death to any who should eat it. When the apple
was ready, she painted her face, disguised herself as a peasant-woman,
and journeyed over the seven hills to where the seven dwarfs dwelt. At
the sound of the knock, Snowdrop put her head out of the window, and
said, "I cannot open the door to anybody, for the seven dwarfs have
forbidden me to do so."
"Very well," replied the peasant-woman; "I only want to be rid of my
apples. Here, I will give you one of them!"
"No!" said Snowdrop, "I dare not take it."
"Art thou afraid of being poisoned?" asked the old woman. "Look here;
I will cut the apple in two, and you shall eat the rosy side, and I
the white."
Now the fruit was so cunningly made, that only the rosy side was
poisoned. Snowdrop longed for the pretty apple; and when she saw the
peasant-woman eating it, she could resist no longer, but stretched out
her hand and took the poisoned half. She had scarcely tasted it, when
she fell lifeless to the ground.
The queen, laughing loudly, watched her with a barbarous look, and
cried, "O thou who art white as snow, red as blood, and black as
ebony, the seven dwarfs cannot awaken thee this time!"
And when she asked the mirror at home,
the mirror at last replied,
    You are the fairest of them all."
So her envious heart had as much repose as an envious heart can ever
know.
When the dwarfs came home in the evening, they found Snowdrop lying
breathless and motionless on the ground. They lifted her up, searched
whether she had anything poisonous about her, unlaced her, combed her
hair, washed her with water and with wine; but all was useless, for
they could not bring the darling back to life. They laid her on a
bier, and all the seven placed themselves round it, and mourned for
her three long days. Then they would have buried her, but that she
still looked so fresh and life-like, and had such lovely rosy cheeks.
"We cannot lower her into the dark earth," said they; and caused a
transparent coffin of glass to be made, so that she could be seen on
all sides, and laid her in it, writing her name outside in letters of
gold, which told that she was the daughter of a king. Then they placed
the coffin on the mountain above, and one of them always stayed by it
and guarded it. But there was little need to guard it, for even the
wild animals came and mourned for Snowdrop: the birds likewise--first
an owl, and then a raven, and afterwards a dove.
Long, long years, did Snowdrop lie in her coffin unchanged, looking as
though asleep, for she was still white as snow, red as blood, and her
hair was black as ebony. At last the son of a king chanced to wander
into the forest, and came to the dwarf's house for a night's shelter.
He saw the coffin on the mountain with the beautiful Snowdrop in it,
and read what was written there in letters of gold. Then he said to
the dwarfs, "Let me have the coffin! I will give you whatever you like
to ask for it."
But the dwarfs answered, "We would not part with it for all the gold
in the world."
He said again, "Yet give it me; for I cannot live without seeing
Snowdrop, and though she is dead, I will prize and honour her as my
beloved."
Then the good dwarfs took pity on him, and gave him the coffin. The
prince had it borne away by his servants. They happened to stumble
over a bush, and the shock forced the bit of poisoned apple which
Snowdrop had tasted out of her throat. Immediately she opened her
eyes, raised the coffin-lid, and sat up alive once more. "Oh, heaven!"
cried she, "where am I?"
The prince answered joyfully, "Thou art with me," and told her what
had happened, saying, "I love thee more dearly than anything else in
the world. Come with me to my father's castle, and be my wife."
Snowdrop, well pleased, went with him, and they were married with much
state and grandeur.
The wicked stepmother was invited to the feast. Richly dressed, she
stood before the mirror, and asked of it:
The mirror answered:
    Here, you are fairest among them all;
    But the young queen over the mountains old,
    Is fairer than you a thousandfold."
The evil-hearted woman uttered a curse, and could scarcely endure her
anguish. She first resolved not to attend the wedding, but curiosity
would not allow her to rest. She determined to travel, and see who
that young queen could be, who was the most beautiful in all the
world. When she came, and found that it was Snowdrop alive again, she
stood petrified with terror and despair. Then two iron shoes, heated
burning hot, were drawn out of the fire with a pair of tongs, and laid
before her feet. She was forced to put them on, and to go and dance at
Snowdrop's wedding--dancing, dancing on these red hot shoes till she
fell down dead.
THE BLUE BIRD.
A powerful and wealthy king, having lost his wife, was so
inconsolable, that he shut himself up for eight entire days, in a
little cabinet, where he spent his time in knocking his head against
the wall, until the courtiers were afraid he would kill himself! They
accordingly placed stuffed mattresses over every wall, and allowed all
his subjects, who desired, to pay him a visit, trusting that something
would be said to alleviate his grief. But neither grave nor lively
discourse made any impression upon him; he scarcely heard what was
spoken. At last there presented herself before him a lady, covered
from head to foot in a long crape veil, who wept and sobbed so much
that the king noticed her. She told him that she did not come, like
the rest, to console him, but rather to encourage his grief. She
herself had lost the best of husbands, and here she began to weep so
profusely, that it was a wonder her eyes were not melted out of her
head. The king began to weep in company, and to talk to her of his
dear wife--she did the same of her dear husband: in fact they talked
so much, that they talked their sorrow quite away. Then, lifting up
her veil, she showed lovely blue eyes and dark eyelashes. The king
noticed her more and more--he spoke less and less of the departed
queen; by and by he ceased to speak of her at all. The end was, that
he courted the inconsolable lady in the black veil, and married her.
By his first marriage he had one daughter, called Florina, or the
little Flora, because she was so fresh and lovely; at the time of his
second marriage she was quite fifteen years old. The new queen also
had a daughter, who was being brought up by her godmother, the fairy
Soussio--her name was Troutina, because her complexion was all spotted
like a trout's back. Indeed, she was altogether ugly and disagreeable;
and when contrasted with Florina, the difference between the two made
the mother so envious, that she and Troutina spared no pains to make
the princess's life unhappy, and to speak ill of her to her father.
One day the king observed that both girls were now old enough to be
married, and that he intended to choose for one of them the first
prince who visited his court.
"Be it so," said the queen; "and as my daughter is older, handsomer,
and more amiable than yours, she shall have the first choice." The
king disputed nothing; indeed, he never did--the queen ruled him in
all things.
Some time after, news came that King Charming would shortly arrive,
and that he was as charming as his name. When the queen heard this
news, she sent for milliners, dressmakers, jewellers, and decked
Troutina from head to foot; but to Florina she allowed not a single
new frock The poor princess had to put on her old one, which was very
old and shabby indeed, she was so much ashamed of it, that she hid
herself in a corner of the saloon, lest King Charming should see her.
But he did not, being overwhelmed with the ceremonious reception given
him by the queen, who presented to him Troutina, all blazing with
jewels, yet so ugly that King Charming involuntarily turned away his
"But, madam, is there not another princess called Florina?"
They pointed to the corner where Florina was hidden, and she came out,
blushing so much, that the young king was dazzled with her beauty, in
spite of her shabby gown. He rose, and made her a profound reverence,
paying her besides so many elegant compliments, that the queen became
very much displeased. King Charming took no heed, but conversed with
Florina for three hours without stopping. Indeed, his admiration of
her was so plain, that the queen and Troutina begged of the king that
she might be shut up in a tower during the whole time of his visit;
so, as soon as she had returned to her apartment, four men in masks
entered, and carried her off, leaving her in a dark cell, and in the
utmost desolation.
Meantime King Charming eagerly awaited her re-appearance, but he saw
her no more; and by the queen's orders, every one about him spoke all
the evil they could of poor Florina, but he refused to believe one
word. "No," said he, "nature could not have united a base nature to
such a sweet innocent face. I will rather suppose that she is
maligned by her stepmother and by Troutina, who is so ugly herself
that no wonder she bears envy towards the fairest woman in the world."
Meanwhile Florina, shut up in her tower, lamented bitterly. "Ah, would
I had been sent here before I saw this amiable prince, who was so kind
to me! It is to prevent my meeting him again, that the queen treats me
so cruelly. Alas! the little beauty I have has cost me sore!"
The queen, to win King Charming for her daughter, made him many
presents; among the rest an order of knighthood, a golden heart,
enamelled in flame-colour, surrounded with many arrows, but pierced by
one only, the motto being, "She alone." The heart was made of a
single ruby, as big as an ostrich's egg. Each arrow was a diamond, a
finger's length, and the chain was of pearls, each weighing a pound.
When the young king received this very handsome present, he was much
perplexed, until they told him it came from the princess whom he had
lately seen, and who requested him to be her knight.
"Florina!" cried he, enchanted.
"No, Troutina."
"Then I am sorry I cannot accept the honour," replied King Charming.
"A monarch is surely at liberty to form his own engagements. I know
what is a knight's duty to his lady, and should wish to fulfil it; as
I cannot fulfil it to Troutina, I would rather decline the favour she
offers me than become unworthy of it."
Civil as this answer was, it irritated the queen and her daughter
exceedingly; and when, since in all his audiences with their majesties
he never saw Florina, he at last inquired where the younger princess
was, the queen answered fiercely, that she was shut up in prison, and
would remain there till Troutina was married.
"And for what reason?" asked King Charming.
"I do not know; and if I did, I would not tell you," replied the
queen, more angrily than ever; so that King Charming quitted her
presence as soon as ever he could.
When he was alone, he sent for one of his attendants, whom he trusted
very much, and begged him to gain information from some court lady
about the princess Florina. This scheme succeeded so well, that
Florina was persuaded to promise she would speak to him for a few
moments next night, from a small window at the bottom of the tower.
But the faithless lady-in-waiting betrayed her to the queen, who
locked her up in her chamber, and determined to send her own daughter
to the window instead. The night was so dark that King Charming never
found out the difference, but made to Troutina all the tender speeches
that he meant for Florina, offering her his crown and his heart, and
ending by placing his own ring on her finger, as a pledge of eternal
fidelity. He also made her agree to fly with him next night, in a
chariot drawn by winged frogs, of which a great magician, one of his
friends, had made him a present. He thought she talked very little,
and that little not in quite so pleasant a voice as formerly; still,
he was too much in love to notice much, and departed very joyful in
having obtained her promise.
Next night Troutina, thickly veiled, quitted the palace by a secret
door. King Charming met her, received her in his arms, and vowed to
love her for ever. Then he lifted her into the fairy chariot, and they
sailed about in the air for some hours. But as he was not likely to
wish to sail about for ever, he at last proposed that they should
descend to earth, and be married. Troutina agreed with all her heart,
but wished that the ceremony should be performed at her godmother's,
the fairy Soussio. So they entered together into the fairy-palace, and
she told her godmother privately how all had happened, and how she had
won King Charming, begging the fairy to pacify him when he found out
his mistake.
"My child," replied the godmother, "that is more easily said than
done; he is too deeply in love with Florina."
Meantime the king was left waiting in a chamber with diamond walls, so
thin and transparent, that through them he saw Troutina and Soussio
conversing together. He stood like a man in a dream: "What! am I
betrayed? Has this enemy to my peace carried away my dear Florina?"
How great was his despair, when Soussio said to him in a commanding
voice, "King Charming, behold the princess Troutina, to whom you have
promised your faith: marry her immediately!"
"Do you think me a fool?" cried the king; "I have promised her
nothing. She is--"
"Stop--if you show me any disrespect--"
"I will respect you as much as a fairy deserves to be respected, if
you will only give me back my princess."
"Am not I she?" said Troutina. "It was to me you gave this ring; to me
you spoke at the window."
"I have been wickedly deceived!" cried the king; "come, my winged
frogs, we will depart immediately."
"You cannot," said Soussio; and, touching him, he found himself fixed
as if his feet were glued to the pavement.
"You may turn me into stone!" exclaimed he; "but I will love no one,
except Florina."
Soussio employed persuasions, threats, promises, entreaties. Troutina
wept, groaned, shrieked, and then tried quiet sulkiness; but the king
uttered not a word. For twenty days and twenty nights he stood there,
without sleeping, or eating, or once sitting down--they talking all
the while.
At length, Soussio, quite worn out, said, "Choose seven years of
penitence and punishment, or marry my goddaughter."
"I choose," answered the king; "and I will not marry your
goddaughter."
"Then fly out of this window, in the shape of a Blue Bird."
Immediately the king's figure changed. His arms formed themselves into
wings; his legs and feet turned black and thin, and claws grew upon
them; his body wasted into the slender shape of a bird, and was
covered with bright blue feathers; his eyes became round and beady;
his nose an ivory beak; and his crown was a white plume on the top of
his head. He began to speak in a singing voice, and then uttering a
doleful cry, fled away as far as possible from the fatal palace of
Soussio.
But, though he looked only a blue bird, the king was his own natural
self still, and remembered all his misfortunes, and did not cease to
lament for his beautiful Florina. Flying from tree to tree, he sang
melancholy songs about her and himself, and wished he were dead many a
The fairy Soussio sent back Troutina to her mother, who was furious.
"Florina shall repent having pleased King Charming!" cried she; and
dressing her own daughter in rich garments, with a gold crown on her
head, and King Charming's ring on her finger, she took her to the
tower. "Florina, your sister is come to see and bring you marriage
presents, for she is now the wife of King Charming."
Florina, doubting no more her lover's loss, fell down in a swoon, and
the queen immediately went to tell her father that she was mad for
love, and must be watched closely lest she should in some way disgrace
herself. The king said, her stepmother might do with her exactly what
she pleased.
When the princess recovered from her swoon, she began to weep, and
wept all night long, sitting at the open window of her tower. The Blue
Bird, who kept continually flying about the palace, but only at night
time, lest any one should see him, happened to come and perch upon a
tall cypress opposite the window, and heard her; but it was too dark
to see who she was, and at daylight she shut the window. Next night,
it was broad moonlight, and then he saw clearly the figure of a young
girl, weeping sore, and knew that it was his beloved Florina.
When she paused in her lamentations, "Adorable princess," said he,
"why do you mourn? Your troubles are not without remedy."
"Who speaks to me so gently?" asked she.
"A king, who loves you, and will never love any other."
So saying he flew up to the window, and at first frightened the
princess very much, for she could not understand such an extraordinary
thing as a bird who talked in words like a man, yet kept still the
piping voice of a nightingale. But soon she began stroking his
beautiful plumage, and caressing him.
"Who are you, charming bird?"
"You have spoken my name. I am King Charming, condemned to be a bird
for seven years, because I will not renounce you."
"Ah! do not deceive me. I know you have married Troutina. She came to
visit me with your diamonds on her neck, and your ring on her finger,
wearing the golden crown and royal mantle which you had given her,
while I was laden with iron chains."
"It is all false," sang the Blue Bird, and told her his whole story,
which comforted her so much that she thought no more of her
misfortunes. They conversed till daybreak, and promised faithfully
every night to meet again thus.
Meantime the princess could not sleep for thinking of her Blue Bird.
"Suppose sportsmen should shoot him, or eagles and kites attack him,
and vultures devour him just as if he were a mere bird and not a great
king? What should I do if I saw his poor feathers scattered on the
ground, and knew that he was no more?" So she grieved all day long.
The beautiful Blue Bird, hid in a hollow tree, spent the hours in
thinking of his princess. "How happy I am to have found her again, and
found her so engaging and so sweet." And as he wished to pay her all
the attentions that a lover delights in, he flew to his own kingdom,
entered his palace by an open window, and sought for some diamond
ear-rings, which he brought back in his beak, and, when night came,
offered them to Florina. So night after night he brought her something
beautiful, and they talked together till day, when he flew back to the
hollow tree, where he sang her praises in a voice so sweet that the
passers-by thought it was not a bird but a spirit. Rumours went about
that the place was haunted, and no one would go near the spot. Thus,
for two years, Florina spent her time, and never once regretted her
captivity. Her Blue Bird visited her every night, and they loved one
another dearly. And though she saw nobody and he lived in the hollow
of a tree, they always found plenty to say to one another.
The malicious queen tried with all her might to get Troutina married,
but in vain. Nobody would have her. "If it were Florina, now," said
the kings, or the kings' ambassadors, "we should be most happy to sign
the contract."
"That girl thwarts us still," said the queen. "She must have some
secret correspondence with foreign suitors. But we will find her out
and punish her."
The mother and daughter finished talking so late that it was midnight
before they reached Florina's apartment. She had dressed herself as
usual, with the utmost care, to please her Blue Bird, who liked to see
her lovely; and she had adorned herself with all the pretty things he
had given her. He perched on the window-sill, and she sat at the
window, and they were singing together a duet, which the queen heard
outside. She burst the door open, and rushed into the chamber.
The first thing Florina did was to open her little window that the
Blue Bird might fly away. But he would not. He had seen the queen and
Troutina, and though he could not defend his princess, he refused to
leave her. The two rushed upon her like furies. Her wonderful beauty
and her splendid jewels startled them. "Whence came all these
ornaments?" cried they.
"I found them," replied Florina, and refused to answer more.
"Some one has given them to you that you might join in treason
against your father and the kingdom.
"Am I likely to do this? I, a poor princess, kept in captivity for two
years, with you as my gaoler?"
"In captivity," repeated the queen. "Why, then, do you dress yourself
so fine, and adorn your chamber with flowers?"
"I have leisure enough: I may just as well spend some of it in
adorning myself, instead of bemoaning my misfortune--innocent as I
am."
"Innocent, indeed!" cried the queen, and began to search the room. In
it she found all King Charming's presents--diamonds, rubies, emeralds,
amethysts--in short, jewels without end. Meantime, from the window the
Blue Bird, who had the eye of a lynx, sang aloud, "Beware, Florina!"
"You see, madam," said Florina, "even the spirits of the air take pity
"I see that you are in league with demons; but your father shall judge
you;" and, very much frightened, the queen left her, and went to hold
counsel with Troutina as to what was to be done. They agreed to put in
Florina's chamber a waiting-maid, who should watch her from morning
till night. When the princess learnt this she was in great grief.
"Alas!" cried she, "I can no longer talk with my bird who loved me so;
and our love was consolation for all our misfortunes. What will he do?
What shall I do?" And she melted into floods of tears.
She dared not open the window, though she heard continually his wings
fluttering round it. For more than a month she waited; but the
serving-maid watched her night and day. At last, overcome with
weariness, the girl fell asleep, and then Florina opened her little
window, and sang in a low voice--
    "Blue Bird, Blue Bird,
    Come to my side."
The Blue Bird flew to the window-sill, and they lavished on one
another a hundred caresses, and talked together till dawn. Next night
it happened the same, till they began to hope that the waiting-maid,
who seemed to enjoy her sleep so much, would sleep every night to
come. But on the third night, hearing a noise, she wakened, and saw by
the light of the moon the Princess Florina sitting at the window with
a beautiful Blue Bird, who warbled in her ear and touched her gently
with his beak. The spy listened and heard all their conversation, very
much astonished that a princess could be so fond of a mere bird. When
day came she related all to the queen and Troutina, who concluded that
the bird could be no other than King Charming. They sent the girl
back, told her to express no curiosity, but to feign sleep, and to go
to bed earlier than usual. Then the poor deceived princess opened her
little window, and sang her usual song--
But no Blue Bird appeared. The queen had caused sharp knives to be
hung outside the hollow of the tree: he flew against them and cut his
feet and wings, till he dropped down, covered with blood.
"Oh, Florina, come to my help!" sighed he, "But she is dead, I know,
and I will die also."
At that moment, his friend, the magician, who since he had seen the
chariot with flying frogs return without King Charming, had gone eight
times round the world in search of him, made his ninth journey, and
came to the tree where the poor Blue Bird lay, calling out, "King
Charming, King Charming!"
The king recognised the voice of his best friend: whereupon the
magician took him out of the hollow tree, healed his wounds, and heard
all his history. He persuaded King Charming that, overcome with fear
and cruel treatment, Florina must have betrayed him.
"Then do as you will with me!" cried the king. "Put me into a cage and
take me back with you. I shall at least be safe there for the five
years that are to be endured."
"But," said the enchanter, "can you remain five years in so
undignified a position? And you have enemies who will assuredly seize
on your kingdom."
"Why can I not return and govern it as before?"
"I fear," replied his friend, "that the thing is difficult. Who would
obey a Blue Bird?"
"Ah, that is too true!" cried the king, sadly, "People only judge by
the outside."
Meantime Florina, overcome with grief, fell dangerously sick, and in
her sickness she kept singing, day and night, her little song--
But no one regarded her.
At last a sudden change took place in her fortunes. The king her
father died, and the people, who knew she was his heir, began to
inquire, with one accord, where was the Princess Florina? They
assailed the palace in crowds, demanding her for their sovereign. The
riot became so dangerous that Troutina and her mother fled away to the
fairy Soussio. Then the populace stormed the tower, rescued the sick
and almost dying princess, and crowned her as their queen.
The exceeding care that was taken of her, and her longing to live in
order to see again her Blue Bird, restored Florina's health, and gave
her strength to call a council and arrange all the affairs of her
kingdom. Then she departed by night, and alone, to go over the world
in search of her Blue Bird.
The magician, who was King Charming's friend, went to the fairy
Soussio, whom he knew, for they had quarrelled and made it up again,
as fairies and magicians do, many times within the last five or six
hundred years. She received him civilly, and asked him what he wanted.
He tried to make a bargain with her but could effect nothing, unless
King Charming would consent to marry Troutina. The enchanter found
this bride so ugly that he could not advise. Still, the Blue Bird had
run so many risks in his cage: the nail it was hung upon had broken,
and the king suffered much in the fall; Minetta, the cat, had glowered
at him with her green eyes; the attendants had forgotten his hemp-seed
and his water-glass, so that he was half dying of hunger and thirst;
and a monkey had plucked at his feathers through the wires as
disrespectfully as if, instead of a king, he had been a linnet or a
jay. Worse than all, his next heir spread reports of his death, and
threatened to seize on his throne.
Under these circumstances the magician thought it best to agree with
Soussio that King Charming should be restored to his kingdom and his
natural shape for six months, on condition that Troutina should remain
in his palace, and that he should try to like her and marry her. If
not, he was to become again a Blue Bird. So he found himself once more
King Charming, and as charming as ever; but he would rather have been
a bird and near his beloved, than a king in the society of Troutina.
The enchanter gave him the best reasons for what had been done, and
advised him to occupy himself with the affairs of his kingdom and
people; but he thought less of these things than how to escape from
the horror of marrying Troutina.
Meanwhile the Queen Florina, in a peasant's dress, with a straw hat on
her head, and a canvas sack on her shoulder, began her journey:
sometimes on horseback, sometimes on foot, sometimes by sea, sometimes
by land, wandering; evermore after her beloved King Charming. One
day, stopping beside a fountain, she let her hair fall loose, and
dipped her weary feet in the cool water, when an old woman, bent, and
leaning on a stick, came by.
"My pretty maiden, what are you doing here all alone?"
"Good mother," replied the queen, "I have too many troubles to be
pleasant company for anybody."
"Tell me your troubles, and I may be able to soften them."
Florina obeyed, and told her whole history, and how she was travelling
over the world in search of the Blue Bird. The little woman listened
attentively, and then, in the twinkling of an eye, became, instead of
an old woman, a beautiful fairy.
"Incomparable Florina, the king you seek is no longer a bird; my
sister Soussio has restored him to his proper shape, and he reigns in
his own kingdom. Do not afflict yourself; happiness will yet be yours.
Take these four eggs, and whenever you are in trouble, break them, and
see what ensues." So saying, the fairy vanished.
Florina, greatly comforted, put the eggs in her sack, and turned her
steps towards the country of King Charming. She walked eight days and
nights without stopping, and then came to a mountain made entirely of
ivory, and nearly perpendicular. Despairing of ever climbing it, she
sank down at the foot, prepared to die there, when she bethought
herself of the eggs. "Let me see," said she, "if the fairy has
deceived me or not." So she broke one, and inside it were little
hooks of gold, which she fitted on her feet and hands, and by means of
which she climbed the mountain with ease. Arrived at the summit she
found new difficulties; for the valley below was one large smooth
mirror, in which sixty thousand women stood admiring themselves. They
had need, for the charm of the mirror was that each saw herself
therein, not as she was, but as she wished to be; and the grimaces
they made were enough to cause a person to die of laughter. Not one of
them had ever gained the top of the mountain; and when they saw
Florina there, they all burst into angry outcries, "How has this woman
got up the hill? If she descends upon our mirror her first footstep
will crack it into a thousand pieces."
The queen, uncertain what to do, broke the second egg, and there flew
out two pigeons harnessed to a fine chariot, in which Florina mounted,
and descended lightly over the mirror to the valley's foot. "Now, my
pretty pigeons," said she, "will you convey me to the palace of King
Charming?" The obedient pigeons did so, flying day and night till they
reached the city gates; when the queen dismissed them with a sweet
kiss, which was worth more than her crown.
How her heart beat as she entered, and begged to see the king! "You!"
cried the servants mocking. "Little peasant-girl, your eyes are not
half good enough to see the king. Besides, he is going to-morrow to
the temple with the Princess Troutina, whom he has at last agreed to
marry."
Florina sat down on a door-step, and hid her face under her straw hat
and her drooping hair. "Alas!" she cried, "my Blue Bird has forsaken
She neither ate nor slept, but rose with the dawn, and pushed her way
through the guards to the temple, where she saw two thrones, one for
King Charming, and the other for Troutina. They arrived shortly; he
more charming and she more repulsive than ever. Knitting her brows,
Troutina exclaimed, "What creature is that who dares approach so near
my golden throne?"
"I am a poor peasant-girl," said Florina. "I come from afar to sell
you curiosities." And she took out of her sack the emerald bracelets
which the Blue Bird had given her.
"These are pretty trinkets," said Troutina; and going up to the king
she asked him what he thought of them. At sight of the ornaments he
turned pale, remembering those he had given to Florina.
"These bracelets are worth half my kingdom; I did not think there had
been more than one pair in the world."
"Then I will buy these," said Troutina; but Florina refused to sell
them for money: the price she asked was permission to sleep a night in
the Chamber of Echoes.
"As you will; your bargains are cheap enough," replied Troutina,
laughing: and when she laughed she showed teeth like the tusks of a
wild boar.
Now the king, when he was a Blue Bird, had informed Florina about this
Chamber of Echoes, where every word spoken could be heard in his own
chamber; she could not have chosen a better way of reproaching him for
his infidelity. But vain were her sobs and complainings; the king had
taken opium to lull his grief; he slept soundly all night long. Next
day, Florina was in great disquietude. Could he have really heard her,
and been indifferent to her sorrow; or had he not heard her at all?
She determined to buy another night in the Chamber of Echoes; but she
had no more jewels to tempt Troutina; so she broke the third egg. Out
of it came a chariot of polished steel, inlaid with gold, drawn by six
green mice, the coachman being a rose-coloured rat, and the postilion
a grey one. Inside the carriage sat little puppets, who behaved
themselves just like live ladies and gentlemen.
When Troutina went to walk in the palace garden, Florina awaited her
in a green alley, and made the mice gallop, and the ladies and
gentlemen bow, till the princess was delighted, and ready to buy the
curiosity at any price. Again Florina exacted permission to pass the
night in the Chamber of Echoes; and again the king, undisturbed by her
lamentation, slept without waking till dawn.
The third day, one of the palace valets, passing her by, said, "You
stupid peasant-girl, it is well the king takes opium every night, or
you would disturb him by that terrible sobbing of yours."
"Does he so?" said the queen, now comprehending all. "Then if you will
promise to-night to keep the opium cup out of his way, these pearls
and diamonds," and she took a handful of them from her sack, "shall
assuredly be yours."
The valet promised; and then Florina broke her fourth egg, out of
which came a pie composed of birds, which, though they had been
plucked, baked, and made ready for the table, sang as beautifully as
birds that are alive. Troutina, charmed with this marvellous novelty,
bought it at the same price as the rest, adding generously a small
piece of gold.
When all the palace were asleep, Florina for the last time, hoping
King Charming would hear her, called upon him with all sorts of tender
expressions, reminding him of their former vows, and their two years
of happiness. "What have I done to thee, that thou shouldst forget me
and marry Troutina?" sobbed she; and the king, who this time was wide
awake, heard her. He could not make out whose voice it was, or whence
it came, but it somehow reminded him of his dearest Florina, whom he
had never ceased to love. He called his valet, inquired who was
sleeping in the Chamber of Echoes, and heard that it was the little
peasant-girl who had sold to Troutina the emerald bracelet. Then he
rose up, dressed himself hastily, and went in search of her. She was
sitting mournfully on the floor, with her hair hiding her face, and
her eyes swollen with tears; but he knew at once his faithful Florina.
He fell on his knees before her covered her hands with kisses, and
they embraced and wept together. For what was the good of all their
love when they were still in the power of the fairy Soussio?
But at this moment appeared the friendly enchanter, with a fairy still
greater than Soussio, the one who had given Florina the four eggs.
They declared that their united power was stronger than Soussio's, and
that the lovers should be married without further delay.
When this news reached Troutina, she ran to the Chamber of Echoes, and
there beheld her beautiful rival, whom she had so cruelly afflicted.
But the moment she opened her mouth to speak, her wicked tongue was
silenced for ever; for the magician turned her into a trout, which he
flung out of the window into the stream that flowed through the castle
As for King Charming and Queen Florina, delivered out of all their
sorrows, and given to one another, their joy was quite inexpressible,
and it lasted to the end of their lives.
     Note.--It will be seen that this tale, which is from the
     French, bears a curious resemblance to Grimm's story of "The
     Iron Stove," except that the latter retains a brevity and
     German simplicity, not found here. This family likeness may
     be traced in the fairy tales of all countries. I merely
     refer to it to show that the repetition of incidents was not
     unobserved or unintentional.--EDITOR.
THE YELLOW DWARF.
There was once a queen, who had been the mother of several children,
but all were dead, except one daughter, of whom she was excessively
fond, humouring and indulging her in all her ways and wishes. This
princess was so extremely beautiful, that she was called All-Fair, and
twenty kings were, at one time, paying their addresses to her. She had
so many lovers, indeed, that she did not know which to choose, and
refused them all. Her mother, being advanced in years, was anxious to
see her married and settled before she died; but as no entreaties
could prevail, she determined to go to the Desert Fairy to ask advice
concerning her stubborn daughter.
Now, this fairy being guarded by two fierce lions, the queen made a
cake of millet, sugar-candy, and crocodiles' eggs, in order to appease
their fury, and pass by them; and having thus provided herself, she
set out. After travelling some time she found herself weary, and lying
down under a tree fell asleep. When she awoke, she heard the roaring
of the lions which guarded the fairy, and on looking for her cake she
found it was gone. This threw her into the utmost agony, as she felt
sure she should be devoured; when, hearing somebody approach, she
raised her eyes, and saw in a tree a little yellow man half a yard
high, picking and eating oranges.
"Ah! queen," said the Yellow Dwarf, for so he was called on account of
his complexion, and the orange-tree in which he lived, "how will you
escape the lions? There is but one way; I know what business brought
you here; promise me your daughter in marriage and I will save you."
The queen, though she could not look without horror upon so frightful
a figure, was forced to consent; and having agreed to the terms
proposed, she instantly found herself in her own palace, and all that
had passed seemed much like a dream: nevertheless, she was so
thoroughly persuaded of the reality of it, that she became melancholy.
The young princess being unable to learn the cause of her mother's
dejection, resolved in her turn to go and inquire of the Desert Fairy;
and, accordingly, having prepared a cake for the lions, she also set
off on the same journey. It happened that All-Fair took exactly the
route her mother had done before her; and coming to the fatal tree
which was loaded with oranges, she felt inclined to pick some;
therefore, laying down her basket, in which she carried the cake, she
plentifully indulged herself with the delicious fruit.
The lions now began to roar; All-Fair, looking for her cake, was
thrown into the utmost despair to find it gone; and as she was
lamenting her deplorable situation, the Yellow Dwarf presented himself
to her with these words:--"Lovely princess, dry your tears, and hear
what I am going to say. You need not proceed to the Desert Fairy, to
know the reason of your mother's indisposition--it is this: she is
ungenerous enough to repent having promised you, her only daughter, to
me in marriage--"
"How!" interrupted the princess; "my mother promised me to you in
marriage;--you such a fright as you!"
"None of your scoffs," returned the Yellow Dwarf; "I warn you not to
rouse my anger. If you will promise to marry me, I will be the
tenderest and most loving husband in the world; if not, save yourself
from the lions, if you can."
The princess, overcome with terror, gave the promise; but such was the
agony of her mind, that she fell into a swoon, and, when she
recovered, she found herself in her own bed, finely adorned with
ribands, with a ring of a single red hair so fastened round her finger
that it could not be got off.
This adventure had the same effect upon All Fair as the former one had
had upon her mother. She grew melancholy, which was remarked and
wondered at by the whole court. The best way to divert her, they
thought, would be to urge her to marry; which the princess, who was
now become less obstinate on that point than formerly, consented to.
Trusting that such a pigmy as the Yellow Dwarf would not dare to
contend with so gallant a person as the King of the Golden Mines, she
fixed upon that prince for her husband. He was exceedingly rich and
powerful, and loved her to distraction. The most superb preparations
were made for the nuptials, and the happy day was fixed when, as they
were proceeding to the ceremony, they saw moving towards them a box,
upon which sat an old woman remarkable for her ugliness.
"Hold, queen and princess!" cried she, knitting her brows; "remember
the promises you have both made to my friend the Yellow Dwarf. I am
the Desert Fairy; and unless All-Fair consent to marry him, I solemnly
swear to burn my crutch."
The queen and princess were struck almost motionless by this
unexpected address of the fairy; but the Prince of the Golden Mines
was exceeding angry, and holding his sword to her throat, he said,
"Fly, wretch! or thy malice shall cost thee thy life."
No sooner had he uttered these words, than the top of the box flying
off, out came the Yellow Dwarf, mounted upon a large Spanish cat.
Placing himself between the king and the fairy, he exclaimed, "Rash
youth! thy rage shall be levelled at me, not at the Desert Fairy. I am
thy rival, and claim thy princess, who is fast bound to me by her own
promise, her mother's, and the single red hair that you see round her
finger."
This so enraged the king, that he cried out, "Contemptible creature!
wert thou worthy of notice, I would sacrifice thee for thy
presumption."
The Yellow Dwarf, clapping spurs to his cat, and drawing a cutlass,
now defied the king to combat; and down they went into the courtyard.
The sun was immediately turned as red as blood, the air became dark,
it thundered heavily, and the flashes of lightning discovered two
giants vomiting fire on each side of the Yellow Dwarf. The king
behaved with such undaunted courage, as to give the dwarf great
trouble; but he was dismayed when he saw the Desert Fairy, mounted on
a winged griffin, and with her head covered with snakes, strike the
princess so hard with a lance, that she fell into the queen's arms,
covered with blood. He immediately left the combat, to go to the
relief of his beloved, but the dwarf was too quick for him; and flying
on his Spanish cat to the balcony where she was, he took her from her
mother's arms, leaped with her upon the top of the palace, and
immediately disappeared.
As the king stood confused and astonished at this strange adventure,
he suddenly found a mist before his eyes, and felt himself lifted up
in the air by some extraordinary power; for the Desert Fairy had
fallen in love with him. To secure him for herself, therefore, she
carried him to a frightful cavern, hoping he would there forget
All-Fair. But finding this scheme ineffectual, she resolved to carry
him to a place altogether as pleasant as the other was terrible; and
accordingly placed him in a chariot drawn by swans. In passing through
the air, he was unspeakably surprised to see his beloved princess in a
castle of polished steel, leaning her head on one hand, and wiping
away her tears with the other. She happened to look up, and had the
mortification to see the king sitting by the fairy who then, by her
art, made herself appear extremely beautiful. Had not the king been
sensible of the fairy's power, he would certainly have tried to free
himself from her by some means or other; but he knew it would be in
vain, and therefore made believe to have a liking for her. At last
they came to a stately palace, fenced on one side by walls of
emeralds, and on the other by a boisterous sea. The king, by
pretending an attachment to the fairy, obtained the liberty to walk by
himself on the shore. There, one day, he heard a voice, and presently
after was surprised by the appearance of a mermaid, who, swimming up
to him with a pleasing smile, spoke to this effect:--"O King of the
Golden Mines, I well know all that has befallen you and the Princess
All-Fair. Do not suspect this to be a contrivance of the fairy to try
you, for I am an inveterate enemy both to her and the Yellow Dwarf;
therefore, if you will place confidence in me, I will lend you my
assistance to procure the release, not only of yourself, but of
All-Fair also."
The overjoyed king promised to do whatever the mermaid should direct,
and seating himself by her desire upon her fish's tail, they sailed
away together over the rolling sea.
When they had sailed some time, "Now," said the mermaid to the king,
"we are approaching the place where your princess is kept prisoner by
the Yellow Dwarf. You will have many enemies to fight before you can
come to her, take, therefore, this sword, with which you may overcome
everything, provided you never let it go out of your hand."
The king returned her all the thanks that the most grateful heart
could suggest; and the mermaid landed and took leave of him, promising
him farther assistance when necessary. The king boldly advanced, and,
meeting with two terrible sphinxes, laid them dead at his feet with
the sword. Next he attacked six dragons that opposed him, and
despatched them also. Then he met four-and-twenty nymphs, crowned with
garlands of flowers, at the sight of whom he stopped, being unwilling
to destroy so much beauty; when he heard a voice say, "Strike! strike!
or you lose your princess for ever!" So he threw himself into the
midst of the nymphs, smiting right and left, and soon dispersed them.
Presently he came to the castle, where was imprisoned the princess
All-Fair. "O my princess," exclaimed he, "behold your faithful lover!"
"Faithful lover!" she replied, drawing herself back: "Did I not see
you passing through the air with a beautiful nymph? were you faithful
then?"
"Yes," replied the king, "I was. That was the detested Desert Fairy,
who was carrying me to a place where I must have languished out all my
days, had it not been for a kind mermaid, by whose assistance it is
that I am now come to release you." Having uttered these words, he
threw himself at her feet; but, catching hold of her gown he
unfortunately let go the magic sword, which the Yellow Dwarf no sooner
discovered, than, leaping from behind a shrub, where he had been
concealed, he ran and seized it. By two cabalistical words he then
conjured up a couple of giants, who laid the king in irons.
"Now," said the Dwarf, "my rival's fate is in my own hands; however,
if he will consent to my marriage with the princess All-Fair, he shall
have his life and liberty."
"No," said the king, "I scorn thy favour on such terms."
The dwarf was so exasperated by this reply, that he instantly stabbed
the king to the heart. The disconsolate princess stood a moment
petrified, and then exclaimed, "Thou hideous creature! since
entreaties could not avail thee, perhaps thou now reliest upon force;
but thou shalt be disappointed. I will die for the love I have for the
King of the Golden Mines!" and so saying she sank down upon his body,
and expired without a sigh.
Thus ended the fate of these two faithful lovers, whom the mermaid
very much regretted; but as all her power lay in the sword, she could
only change them into two palm-trees, which, preserving a constant and
mutual affection, still fondly unite their branches together.
THE SIX SWANS.
Once upon a time, a king, hunting in a great forest, chased a wild
boar so eagerly, that none of his people could follow him. When
evening came, he stopped to look about him, and saw that he had lost
himself. He sought everywhere for a way out of the wood, but could
find none. Then he perceived coming towards him an old woman, whose
head kept constantly shaking. She was a witch.
"My good woman," said he to her, "cannot you show me the way through
the wood?"
"O yes, your majesty," answered she, "that I can, but only on one
condition, and if you do not agree to it, you will never get out, and
must die here of hunger."
"What is the condition?" asked the king.
"I have an only daughter," said the old woman, "she is as beautiful as
any one you could find in the wide world, and well deserves to be your
wife; if you will make her your queen, I will show you the way out of
the wood."
The king, in the fear of his heart, consented, and the old woman led
him to her house, where her daughter sat by the fire. She received the
king as if she had expected him, and he saw that she was very
beautiful; but still she did not please him, and he could not look at
her without a secret shudder. After he had lifted up the maiden
beside him on his horse, the old woman showed him the way, and the
king arrived again at his royal castle, where the wedding was
celebrated.
He had been married once before, and had by his first wife seven
children, six boys and a girl, whom he loved more than anything in the
world. But, because he was afraid that the stepmother might not treat
them well, or might even do them some harm, he took them to a lonely
castle which stood in the middle of a wood. It was so hidden, and the
road was so difficult to find, that he himself would not have found
it, if a wise woman had not given him a wonderful skein of thread;
which, when he threw it down before him, unrolled of itself and showed
him the way. The king went out so often to his dear children, that the
queen noticed his absence, and was full of curiosity to know what
business took him thus alone to the wood. So she gave his servants a
sum of money, and they told her the secret, and also told her of the
skein, which was the only thing that could show the way. After that
she never rested till she had found out where the king kept the skein.
Then she made some little white silk shirts, and as she had learned
witchcraft from her mother, she sewed a spell into every one of them.
And one day when the king was gone out to hunt, she took the little
shirts and went into the wood, and the skein showed her the way.
The six brothers, who saw some one in the distance, thought their
dear father was coming, and ran to meet him, full of joy. As they
approached, the queen threw one of the shirts over each of them, and
when the shirts touched their bodies, they were changed into swans,
and flew away over the wood. The witch's daughter went home quite
happy, and thought she had got rid of all her stepchildren; but the
one little girl had not run out with her brothers, and the queen knew
nothing about her.
Next day, the king came joyfully to visit his children, but he found
nobody except the little sister.
"Where are your brothers?" asked he.
"Oh, dear father," she answered, "they are gone, and have left me
alone," and then she told him all that she had seen out of her window;
how her brothers were turned into swans, and had flown away over the
wood; she also showed him the feathers which they had dropped into the
courtyard, and which she had picked up.
The king was grieved, but he never thought that the queen had done
this wicked deed; however, because he dreaded lest the little girl
would be stolen from him likewise, he wished to take her away with
him. But she was afraid of the stepmother, and begged the king to let
her stay one night more in the castle in the wood.
The poor little girl thought, "I cannot rest here any longer, I will
go and look for my brothers."
And when the night came, she ran away, and went straight into the
wood. She went on all through the night, and the next day too, till
she was so tired that she could go no further. Then she saw a little
house, and went in, and found a room with six little beds; she did not
dare to lie down in any, but crept under one of them, laid herself on
the hard floor, and meant to pass the night there. But when the sun
was just going to set, she heard a rustling, and saw six swans come
flying in at the window. They sat down on the floor, and blew at one
another, and blew all their feathers off, and took off their
swan's-skins like shirts. Then the little girl saw them and recognised
her brothers, and was very glad, and crept out from under the bed.
The brothers were not less rejoiced when they saw their little sister,
but their joy did not last long.
"You cannot stop here," said they to her, "this is a house belonging
to robbers; if they come home, and find you, they will kill you."
"Cannot you protect me?" asked the little sister.
"No," answered they, "we can only take off our swan's-skins for a
quarter of an hour every evening, and have our natural shape for that
time, but afterwards we are turned into swans again."
The little sister cried and said, "Cannot you be released?"
"Oh, no!" answered they, "the conditions are too hard. You must not
speak or laugh for six years, and must make for us six shirts out of
stitchweed during that time. If while you are making them a single
word comes from your mouth, all your work will be of no use." When her
brothers had said this, the quarter of an hour was over, and they
turned into swans again, and flew out of the window.
But the little girl made a firm resolution to release her brothers,
even if it cost her her life. She left the house, and went into the
middle of the wood, and climbed up in a tree and spent the night
there. Next morning she got down, collected a quantity of stitchweed,
and began to sew. She could not speak to any one, and she did not want
to laugh; so she sat, and only looked at her work.
When she had been there a long time, it happened that the king of the
country was hunting in the wood, and his hunters came to the tree on
which the little girl sat. They called to her, and said, "Who are
But she gave them no answer.
"Come down to us," said they, "we will not do you any harm."
But she only shook her head. As they kept teasing her with their
questions, she threw them down her gold necklace, and thought they
would be satisfied with that. But they did not leave off, so she threw
her sash down to them, and as that was no good, she threw down her
garters, and at last everything that she had on, and could spare; so
that she had nothing left but her shift. But the hunters would not be
sent away, and climbed up the tree and brought down the little girl
and took her to the king.
The king asked, "Who are you? what were you doing up in the tree?"
But she did not answer. He asked it in all the languages that he knew,
but she remained as dumb as a fish. But, because she was so beautiful,
the king's heart was moved, and he fell deeply in love with her. He
wrapped his cloak round her, took her before him on his horse, and
brought her to his castle. Then he had her dressed in rich clothes,
and she shone in her beauty like bright sunshine; but they could not
get a word out of her. He set her by him at the table, and her modest
look and proper behaviour pleased him so much, that he said, "I will
marry her, and no one else in the world," and after a few days he was
married to her.
But the king had a wicked mother, who was not pleased with this
marriage, and spoke ill of the young queen. "Who knows where the girl
comes from," said she, "she cannot speak; she is not good enough for a
king."
A year after, when the queen brought her first child into the world,
the old mother took it away, and smeared her mouth with blood while
she was asleep. Then she went to the king, and accused her of eating
her child. The king would not believe it, and would not let anyone do
her any harm. And she always sat and sewed the shirts, and took no
notice of anything else. Next time, when she had another beautiful
baby, the wicked stepmother did the same as before; but the king could
not resolve to believe what she said.
He said, "My wife is too pious and good to do such a thing; if she
were not dumb, and if she could defend herself, her innocence would be
made clear."
But when for the third time the old woman took away the new-born
child, and accused the queen, who could not say a word in her own
defence, the king could not help himself; he was forced to give her up
to the court of justice, and she was condemned to suffer death by
When the day came upon which the sentence was to be executed, it was
exactly the last day of the six years, in which she might not speak or
laugh; and she had freed her dear brothers from the power of the
spell. The six little shirts were finished, except that on the last
one a sleeve was wanting. When she came to the place of execution, she
laid the shirts on her arm, and when she stood at the stake, and the
fire was just going to be lit, she looked round, and there came six
swans flying through the air. Then her heart leaped with joy, for she
saw that her deliverance was near.
The swans flew to her, and crouched down, so that she could throw the
shirts over them; as soon as the shirts were touched by them, their
swan's-skins fell off, and her brothers stood before her. They were
all grown up, strong and handsome; only the youngest had no left arm,
but instead of it a swan's wing.
They hugged and kissed their sister many times, and then the queen
went to the king, and began to speak, and said, "Dearest husband, now
I may speak, and declare to you that I am innocent and falsely
accused;" and she told him about the deceit of the old mother, who had
taken away her three children, and hidden them.
However they were soon fetched safely back, to the great joy of the
king; and the wicked mother-in-law was tied to the stake, and burnt to
ashes. But the king and queen, with their six brothers, lived many
years in peace and happiness.
THE PRINCE WITH THE NOSE.
There was once a king who was passionately in love with a beautiful
princess, but she could not be married because a magician had
enchanted her. The king went to a good fairy to inquire what he should
do. Said the fairy, after receiving him graciously; "Sir, I will tell
you a secret. The princess has a great cat whom she loves so well that
she cares for nothing and nobody else; but she will be obliged to
marry any person who is adroit enough to walk upon the cat's tail."
"That will not be very difficult," thought the king to himself, and
departed, resolving to trample the cat's tail to pieces rather than
not succeed in walking upon it. He went immediately to the palace of
his fair mistress and the cat; the animal came in front of him,
arching its back in anger as it was wont to do. The king lifted up his
foot, thinking nothing would be so easy as to tread on the tail, but
he found himself mistaken. Minon--that was the creature's
name--twisted itself round so sharply that the king only hurt his own
foot by stamping on the floor. For eight days did he pursue the cat
everywhere: up and down the palace he was after it from morning till
night, but with no better success; the tail seemed made of
quicksilver, so very lively was it. At last the king had the good
fortune to catch Minon sleeping, when tramp, tramp! he trod on the
tail with all his force.
Minon woke up, mewed horribly, and immediately changed from a cat into
a large, fierce-looking man, who regarded the king with flashing eyes.
"You must marry the princess," cried he, "because you have broken the
enchantment in which I held her; but I will be revenged on you. You
shall have a son with a nose as long as--that;" he made in the air a
curve of half a foot; "yet he shall believe it is just like all other
noses, and shall be always unfortunate till he has found out it is
not. And if you ever tell anybody of this threat of mine, you shall
die on the spot." So saying, the magician disappeared.
The king, who was at first much terrified, soon began to laugh at this
adventure. "My son might have a worse misfortune than too long a
nose," thought he. "At least it will hinder him neither in seeing nor
hearing. I will go and find the princess, and marry her at once."
He did so, but he only lived a few months after, and died before his
little son was born, so that nobody knew anything about the secret of
the nose.
The little prince was so much wished for, that when he came into the
world they agreed to call him Prince Wish. He had beautiful blue eyes
and a sweet little mouth, but his nose was so big that it covered half
his face. The queen, his mother, was inconsolable; but her ladies
tried to satisfy her by telling her that the nose was not nearly so
large as it seemed, that it would grow smaller as the prince grew
bigger, and that if it did not a large nose was indispensable to a
hero. All great soldiers, they said, had great noses, as everybody
knew. The queen was so very fond of her son that she listened eagerly
to all this comfort. Shortly she grew so used to the prince's nose
that it did not seem to her any larger than ordinary noses of the
court; where, in process of time, everybody with a long nose was very
much admired, and the unfortunate people who had only snubs were taken
very little notice of.
Great care was observed in the education of the prince; and as soon as
he could speak they told him all sorts of amusing tales, in which all
the bad people had short noses, and all the good people had long ones.
No person was suffered to come near him who had not a nose of more
than ordinary length; nay, to such an extent did the courtiers carry
their fancy, that the noses of all the little babies were ordered to
be pulled out as far as possible several times a day, in order to make
them grow. But grow as they would, they never could grow as long as
that of Prince Wish. When he was old enough his tutor taught him
history; and whenever any great king or lovely princess was referred
to, the tutor always took care to mention that he or she had a long
nose. All the royal apartments were filled with pictures and portraits
having this peculiarity, so that at last Prince Wish began to regard
the length of his nose as his greatest perfection, and would not have
had it an inch less even to save his crown.
When he was twenty years old his mother and his people wished him to
marry. They procured for him the likenesses of many princesses, but
the one he preferred was Princess Darling, daughter of a powerful
monarch and heiress to several kingdoms. Alas! with all her beauty,
this princess had one great misfortune, a little turned-up nose,
which, every one else said, made her only the more bewitching. But
here, in the kingdom of Prince Wish, the courtiers were thrown by it
into the utmost perplexity. They were in the habit of laughing at all
small noses; but how dared they make fun of the nose of Princess
Darling? Two unfortunate gentlemen, whom Prince Wish had overheard
doing so, were ignominiously banished from the court and capital.
After this, the courtiers became alarmed, and tried to correct their
habit of speech; but they would have found themselves in constant
difficulties, had not one clever person struck out a bright idea. He
said that though it was indispensably necessary for a man to have a
great nose, women were different; and that a learned man had
discovered in a very old manuscript that the celebrated Cleopatra,
Queen of Egypt, the beauty of the ancient world, had a turned-up nose.
At this information Prince Wish was so delighted that he made the
courtier a very handsome present, and immediately sent off ambassadors
to demand Princess Darling in marriage.
She accepted his offer at once, and returned with the ambassadors. He
made all haste to meet and welcome her; but when she was only three
leagues distant from his capital, before he had time even to kiss her
hand, the magician who had once assumed the shape of his mother's cat,
Minon, appeared in the air and carried her off before the lover's very
Prince Wish, almost beside himself with grief, declared that nothing
should induce him to return to his throne and kingdom till he had
found Darling. He would suffer none of his courtiers or attendants to
follow him; but, bidding them all adieu, mounted a good horse, laid
the reins on the animal's neck, and let him take him wherever he
would.
The horse entered a wide-extended plain, and trotted on steadily the
whole day without finding a single house. Master and beast began
almost to faint with hunger; and Prince Wish might have wished himself
safe at home again, had he not discovered, just at dusk, a cavern,
where there sat, beside a bright lantern, a little woman who might
have been more than a hundred years old.
She put on her spectacles the better to look at the stranger, and he
noticed that her nose was so small that the spectacles would hardly
stay on; then the prince and the fairy,--for it was a fairy--burst
into a mutual fit of laughter.
"What a funny nose?" cried the one.
"Not so funny as yours, madam," returned the other. "But pray let us
leave our noses alone, and be good enough to give me something to
eat, for I am dying with hunger, and so is my poor horse."
"With all my heart," answered the fairy. "Although your nose is
ridiculously long, you are no less the son of one of my best friends.
I loved your father like a brother; he had a very handsome nose."
"What is wanting to my nose?" asked Wish, rather savagely.
"Oh! nothing at all. On the contrary there is a great deal too much of
it; but never mind, one may be a very honest man, and yet have too big
a nose. As I said, I was a great friend of your father's; he came
often to see me. I was very pretty then, and oftentimes he used to say
to me, 'My sister--'"
"I will hear the rest, madam, with pleasure, when I have supped; but
will you condescend to remember that I have tasted nothing all day?"
"Poor boy," said the fairy, "I will give you some supper directly; and
while you eat it I will tell you my history in six words, for I hate
much talking. A long tongue is as insupportable as a long nose; and I
remember when I was young how much I used to be admired because I was
not a talker; indeed, some one said to the queen, my mother,--for poor
as you see me now I am the daughter of a great king, who always--"
"Ate when he was hungry, I hope," interrupted the Prince, whose
patience was fast departing.
"You are right," said the imperturbable old fairy; "and I will bring
you your supper directly, only I wish first just to say that the king
my father--"
"Hang the king your father!" Prince Wish was about to exclaim, but he
stopped himself, and only observed that however the pleasure of her
conversation might make him forget his hunger, it could not have the
same effect upon his horse, who was really starving.
The fairy, pleased at his civility, called her servants and bade them
supply him at once with all he needed. "And," added she, "I must say
you are very polite and very good-tempered, in spite of your nose."
"What has the old woman to do with my nose?" thought the prince. "If I
were not so very hungry I would soon show her what she is--a regular
old gossip and chatter-box. She to fancy she talks little, indeed! One
must be very foolish not to know one's own defects. This comes of
being born a princess. Flatterers have spoiled her, and persuaded her
that she talks little. Little, indeed! I never knew anybody chatter so
While the prince thus meditated, the servants were laying the table,
the fairy asking them a hundred unnecessary questions, simply for the
pleasure of hearing herself talk. "Well," thought Wish, "I am
delighted that I came hither, if only to learn how wise I have been in
never listening to flatterers, who hide from us our faults, or make us
believe they are perfections. But they could never deceive me. I know
all my own weak points, I trust." As truly he believed he did.
So he went on eating contentedly, nor stopped till the old fairy began
to address him.
"Prince," said she, "will you be kind enough to turn a little? Your
nose casts such a shadow that I cannot see what is in my plate. And,
as I was saying, your father admired me and always made me welcome at
court. What is the court etiquette there now? Do the ladies still go
to assemblies, promenades, balls?--I beg your pardon for laughing, but
how very long your nose is."
"I wish you would cease to speak of my nose," said the prince,
becoming annoyed. "It is what it is, and I do not desire it any
shorter."
"Oh! I see that I have vexed you," returned the fairy. "Nevertheless,
I am one of your best friends, and so I shall take the liberty of
always--" She would doubtless have gone on talking till midnight; but
the prince, unable to bear it any longer, here interrupted her,
thanked her for her hospitality, bade her a hasty adieu, and rode
He travelled for a long time, half over the world, but he heard no
news of Princess Darling. However, in each place he went to, he heard
one remarkable fact--the great length of his own nose. The little boys
in the streets jeered at him, the peasants stared at him, and the more
polite ladies and gentlemen whom he met in society used to try in vain
to keep from laughing, and to get out of his way as soon as they
could. So the poor prince became gradually quite forlorn and solitary;
he thought all the world was mad, but still he never thought of there
being anything queer about his own nose.
At last the old fairy, who, though she was a chatter-box, was very
good-natured, saw that he was almost breaking his heart. She felt
sorry for him, and wished to help him in spite of himself, for she
knew the enchantment, which hid from him the Princess Darling, could
never be broken till he had discovered his own defect. So she went in
search of the princess, and being more powerful than the magician,
since she was a good fairy, and he was an evil magician, she got her
away from him, and shut her up in a palace of crystal, which she
placed on the road which Prince Wish had to pass.
He was riding along, very melancholy, when he saw the palace; and at
its entrance was a room, made of the purest glass, in which sat his
beloved princess, smiling and beautiful as ever. He leaped from his
horse, and ran towards her. She held out her hand for him to kiss, but
he could not get at it for the glass. Transported with eagerness and
delight, he dashed his sword through the crystal, and succeeded in
breaking a small opening, to which she put up her beautiful rosy
mouth. But it was in vain, Prince Wish could not approach it. He
twisted his neck about, and turned his head on all sides, till at
length, putting up his hand to his face, he discovered the
impediment.
"It must be confessed," exclaimed he, "that my nose is too long."
That moment the glass walls all split asunder, and the old fairy
appeared, leading Princess Darling.
"Avow, prince," said she, "that you are very much obliged to me, for
now the enchantment is ended. You may marry the object of your choice.
But," added she, smiling, "I fear I might have talked to you for ever
on the subject of your nose, and you would not have believed me in its
length, till it became an obstacle to your own inclinations. Now
behold it!" and she held up a crystal mirror. "Are you satisfied to be
no different from other people?"
"Perfectly," said Prince Wish, who found his nose had shrunk to an
ordinary length. And, taking the Princess Darling by the hand, he
kissed her, courteously, affectionately, and satisfactorily. Then they
departed to their own country, and lived very happy all their days.
THE HIND OF THE FOREST.
A beautiful queen, whose subjects adored her, and whose husband
thought her the best woman in the world, had but one sorrow, which was
equally a sorrow both to the king and the country--she brought him no
heir to the throne. She, at last, grew so melancholy, that she was
ordered for her health to drink the medicinal waters that were found
in a celebrated wood; and one day, sitting beside one of these
fountains, which fell into a marble and porphyry basin, she sent all
her ladies away, that she might the better weep and lament unobserved.
"How unhappy am I," said she; "five years I have been married, and am
still childless, while the poorest women in the land have children by
the dozen. Am I to die without ever giving the king an heir?"
While she spoke, she noticed that the water of the fountain was
slightly disturbed, and there issued thence a large cray-fish, who
thus addressed her, "Great queen, you shall have what you desire; but
first you must go to the fairy-palace which is near here, though so
surrounded by mists and clouds as to be invisible to mortal eyes,
unless you will be conducted there by a poor cray-fish."
Though very much surprised, the queen answered courteously that she
had no objection, except that the animal's method of walking would not
well suit her own.
The shell-fish smiled--if a shell-fish can smile--and immediately took
the shape of a pretty little old woman. "Madam," said she, "we now
need not walk crab-fashion. Consider me as your friend, for, indeed, I
am desirous of being so."
So saying, she jumped out of the fountain, her clothes not being the
least wet, though they were made of white and crimson velvet, nor her
grey hair damp: it was tied with green ribbons, and appeared all in
order and smooth as silk. She saluted the queen, and then conducted
her by a road which, strange to say, well as she knew every portion of
the wood, her majesty had never before seen, to a palace of which the
walls, roofs, and balconies were built entirely of diamonds.
"Is all this a dream?" cried the delighted queen.
But no, it was a reality, for the gates straightway opened, and six
beautiful fairies appeared, who, making her a profound reverence,
presented her with six flowers composed of jewels: a rose, a tulip, an
anemone, a jasmine, a carnation, and a heartsease.
"Madam," said they, "we could not give you a greater mark of our
favour than in permitting you to come here. We are delighted to tell
you that by and by you will have a little daughter, whom you must
name Désirée--the Desired. As soon as she is born, call us, and we
will endow her with all sorts of good qualities. You have only to take
this bouquet, and name each separate flower, thinking of us, when
immediately we shall be present in your chamber."
The queen, transported with joy, embraced all the fairies, spent the
day with them, and returned, laden with presents, to the fountain
side; where the little old woman jumped into the water, became a
cray-fish again, and disappeared.
In due time the Princess Désirée was born, and the queen did as she
was told in naming the flowers. Soon, all the six fairies appeared, in
different chariots; of ebony, drawn by white pigeons--of ivory, drawn
by black crows, and so on, in great variety. They entered the royal
chamber with an air at once cheerful and majestic, embraced the queen
and the little princess, and spread out all their presents. These
were, linen, so fine that none but fairy hands could have spun it;
lace and embroidery without end; and a cradle, the wonder of the
world. It was made of wood more precious than gold, and at each corner
stood four animated images, little cupids, who, as soon as the baby
cried, began to rock it of their own accord. Then the six fairies
kissed and dandled the princess, bestowing on her for her portion
beauty, good temper, good health, talents, long life, and the faculty
of doing thoroughly well everything she tried to do. The queen,
overcome with gratitude, was thanking them with all her heart for
their kindness to her little daughter, when she saw enter her chamber
a cray-fish, so large that it could hardly pass through the door.
"Ungrateful queen," said the crab, "have you forgotten the fairy of
the fountain? You sent for these my sisters, and not for me, who am
the one to whom you owed most of all."
The queen made a hundred apologies, and the six fairies tried vainly
to pacify the other one; but she was determined, as she said, to
punish ingratitude. "However," added she, "I will give no worse gift
to the princess than to warn you, that if you let her see daylight
before she is fifteen years old, you will repent it." So saying, she
retired backwards, crab-fashion, resisting all entreaties to resume
her proper form and join in the festivities.
The afflicted mother took council with the six fairies how she was to
save her baby from this impending evil, and after many conflicting
opinions they advised her to build a tower without doors or windows,
and with a subterranean entrance, which the princess might inhabit
till she had passed the fatal age. Everything is easy to fairies; so
three strokes of their wands, making eighteen strokes in all, began
and finished the edifice. It was built of green and white marble,
ornamented inside with diamonds and emeralds, and hung with
tapestry--all fairy work--on which was pictured the lives of heroes.
Though there was only lamp-light allowed, yet the lamps were so
numerous, that they made the tower seem as bright as day. Whether the
princess was ever permitted any fresh air, or taken out for a walk by
starlight or moonlight, the history does not say; but it does say one
thing, that she grew up very happy, very lovely, and very well
educated.
The six fairies came frequently to see her, and were most kind and
affectionate to her; but the one she loved best among them all was
Tulip. By this fairy's advice, the nearer she approached the age of
fifteen, the more carefully was Désirée shut up from daylight. But her
mother, who was very proud of her beauty, caused her portrait to be
painted, and sent among all the neighbouring courts, in order that
some prince might seek her in marriage. There was one prince who was
so captivated by this likeness, that he shut himself up with it, and
talked to it, as if it had been alive, making love to it in the most
passionate manner, and then falling into a hopeless melancholy.
When his father tried to discover the cause of this--"Sir," said
Prince Warrior (he went by that name, because, young as he was, he had
already gained three battles), "my grief is that you wish me to marry
the Black Princess, while I will only marry the Princess Désirée. I
have seen her portrait, and without her I shall surely die. Behold
her!"
The king looked at the portrait. "Well, my son, I cannot wish for a
more charming daughter-in-law, we will retract our offers for the
Black Princess, and send an ambassador to propose for the Princess
Désirée."
The prince, kissing his father's hand, overwhelmed him with his
gratitude and joy. A courtier, Becafico by name, young and gallant,
was despatched with eighty equipages, a hundred mounted squires, and
the portrait of the Prince Warrior, to ask the Princess Désirée in
marriage. The report of his splendours travelled before him, till it
reached the ears of the king and queen, and of the six fairies, who
were all equally delighted.
"But," said the Fairy Tulip, who was the sagest of them, "beware,
queen, of allowing Becafico to see our child," as they tenderly called
Désirée, "and do not upon any account suffer her to leave her tower
for the kingdom of Prince Warrior until her fifteenth birthday is
past."
The ambassador arrived; his magnificent train took twenty-three days
in going through the gates of the city. He made his harangue to the
king and queen, and much state ceremonial passed between them; then he
begged for the honour of an audience with the princess, and was very
much astonished to find it denied him--still more so, when the king
candidly told him the whole story.
The queen had strictly enjoined the ladies of honour not to tell her
daughter one word of the ambassador's visit, or her intended marriage;
yet somehow the princess already knew it quite well. But she was wise
enough to say nothing about it; and when her mother showed her the
prince's portrait, and asked her if she should like such a gallant
young man for her husband, she replied humbly that she should be
quite satisfied with any choice her parents made for her. So her hand
was promised, but as she still wanted three months of fifteen, the
prince was requested to wait thus long.
He took this delay so much to heart, that he could neither eat nor
sleep; meantime Désirée was little better--she did nothing but look at
the prince's portrait, and was exceedingly irritable with Longthorn
and Gilliflower, her two maids of honour. The other lady--the Black
Princess--was in equally sore plight, for she, too, had fallen in love
with the prince's portrait, and his rejection of her hand offended her
"What," said she to the ambassador, "your master does not find me
handsome enough, or rich enough?"
"Madam," said the ambassador, "as much as a subject dare blame a
sovereign, I blame my prince; had I the first throne in the world, I
should know to whom to offer it."
He said this, because he feared the bastinado, for Ethiopians are warm
haters as well as warm lovers. The Black Princess was softened, and
dismissed him, on which he gladly took himself out of the country.
But the Ethiopian lady was too deeply offended with Prince Warrior to
pardon him so readily. She mounted her ivory car, drawn by six
ostriches which ran at the rate of six leagues an hour, and went to
the palace of her godmother, the Fairy of the Fountain, who had been
so offended by being forgotten at the birth of Désirée. Arrived
there, she unfolded all her annoyances. The fairy consoled her, and
promised to aid her in her revenge.
Meantime Becafico had travelled with all diligence to the capital of
Désirée's father, where with earnest entreaties he begged that the
princess might be sent back with him to her betrothed spouse, who
otherwise would certainly die; at which tidings the princess herself
was so much moved that she fainted away. Thus her parents discovered
how deeply in love she was with Prince Warrior.
"Do not disquiet yourself, my dear child," said the queen; "if the
prince suffers, it is you who can console him. My only fear is on
account of the menaces of the Fairy of the Fountain."
But Désirée was so eager to start, that she suggested being sent away
in a closed carriage, where the light of day should never penetrate,
and which should only be opened at night-time to give her food. She
was willing to suffer any inconvenience for the sake of saving the
life of Prince Warrior.
The parents assented. So there was built a magnificent equipage of
green velvet outside, and lined with rose-colour and silver brocade.
It was very large, but it shut up as tight as a box, and it had a huge
lock, the key of which was entrusted to one of the highest noblemen of
the court. In this carriage Désirée was placed, after most affecting
adieus, by her father and mother; and with her were sent her maids of
honour Longthorn and Gilliflower, and a lady-in-waiting, who was the
mother of both. Now, Longthorn cared little for the princess, but she
cared very much for Prince Warrior, whose portrait she had seen; and
when the bridal train departed, she said to her mother that she should
certainly die if this marriage were accomplished; so the mother,
notwithstanding the confidence placed in her by queen, that she should
watch over the princess, and carefully seclude her from daylight until
she had reached the age of fifteen, yielded to her own child's
persuasions, and determined to betray her trust.
Longthorn, who learned each evening from the officers of the
household, when they came to bring the princess her supper, how far
they were on their journey, at last persuaded her mother, who put off
the cruel act as long as she could, that it would never do to wait any
longer. They were nearly at the capital, and the young prince might,
in his impatience, come to meet them, and the opportunity be lost. So
next day, at noon, when the sun was at the hottest, the
lady-in-waiting took out a knife, which she had brought with her for
the purpose, cut a large hole in the side of the carriage where they
were all shut up together, and the princess, for the first time in her
life, beheld daylight. She uttered a deep sigh, and immediately leaped
out of the carriage in the form of a white hind, which fled away like
lightning, and hid itself in the thickest recesses of a neighbouring
wood.
None of the train perceived her, or if they had, they would not have
known it was she; besides, the Fairy of the Fountain immediately sent
such a storm of thunder and lightning that the whole cavalcade took
shelter in the nearest place they could find. The only persons who
knew what had happened were Longthorn, her mother, and Gilliflower;
but Gilliflower, overwhelmed with grief, had sprung out of the
carriage after her beloved mistress; so the two others were left
alone. Longthorn immediately put on the garments of Désirée, and
adorned herself with her royal mantle, her crown of diamonds, her
sceptre of a single ruby, and the globe which she carried in her left
hand, composed of one enormous pearl. Thus attired, with her mother
bearing her train, the false Désirée marched into the city--they two
alone; for, by the fairy's contrivance, the rest of the attendants had
been scattered in all directions. Longthorn doubted not the prince
would be already advancing to meet his bride, which was indeed the
case; though he was so weak that he had to be conveyed in a litter,
surrounded by courtiers and knights, who all wore splendid armour and
green plumes, green being the favourite colour of the princess. Seeing
the two ladies so richly dressed, coming forward on foot and
unattended, they dismounted, and respectfully greeted them.
"May I inquire," said Longthorn, "who is in that litter?"
"Madam," replied a knight, "it is the Prince Warrior, who comes to
meet his betrothed, the Princess Désirée."
"Tell him," said Longthorn, "that I am she. A fairy, jealous of my
happiness, has driven away all my attendants, but that I am Désirée is
proved by these my royal ornaments, and the letters of my father,
borne by my lady-of-honour here."
Immediately the courtiers kissed the hem of her robe, and made all
diligence to announce to the prince, and the king his father, who
accompanied him, that the Princess Désirée had arrived.
"What!" cried the king; "arrived here in full daylight?" But the
prince, burning with impatience, asked no questions, except about the
lady herself--"Is she not a miracle of beauty--according to her
portrait?" There was no reply. "You are afraid to speak, gentlemen,
lest you should praise her too much."
But the courtiers were still silent. "Sir," at last said one of the
boldest of them, "you had better go and see the princess yourself."
The prince, much surprised, would have thrown himself out of his
litter; but he was too feeble, and his father went instead. When the
king beheld the false princess, he involuntarily drew back; but the
lady-of-honour advancing boldly, said:
"Sire, this is the Princess Désirée;--I bear letters from the king and
queen her parents, and also a casket of priceless jewels, which they
charged me to place in your hands."
The king kept a mournful silence, and regarded his son, who now
approached, leaning on one of the courtiers. When he looked at the
girl, he recoiled with disgust; for she was so gaunt and tall that the
clothes of Désirée scarcely covered her knees, and her extreme
thinness, her red, hooked nose, her black and ill-shaped teeth, made
her as ugly as Désirée was beautiful. Prince Warrior, who for months
had thought of nothing but his lovely bride, stood petrified. "King,"
said he to his father, "I am betrayed! this is not the lady whose
portrait was sent me, and to whom I have plighted my faith; I have
been deceived, and the deception will cost me my life."
"What do I hear?" replied Longthorn, haughtily. "Prince, who has
deceived you? you will be no victim in marrying me."
"Ah! my beautiful princess," exclaimed the lady-of-honour, "it is we
who are victims. What a reception for one of your rank! what
inconstancy--what falsehood! But the king your father shall make them
hear reason."
"We will make him hear reason!" cried the other king, indignantly. "He
promised us a beautiful princess, and he has sent us a skeleton, a
fright. I do not wonder he has kept it shut up for fifteen years, and
now he wishes to foist it upon us."
And without taking any more notice of Longthorn, he and his son
remounted each into his litter, and departed.
Prince Warrior was so overcome by this unexpected affliction, that for
a long time he did not speak a word. Then he resolved, as soon as his
health allowed, to depart secretly from the capital, and seek some
solitary place where he might pass the remainder of his sad life. He
communicated this design to no one but the faithful Becafico, who
insisted upon following his fortunes wherever he went. So, one day,
the prince left a letter for his father, assuring him, that as soon as
his mind was tranquillized he would return to the court, but imploring
that in the meantime no search might be made after him; then he and
Becafico departed together.
Meanwhile, the poor white hind fled into the wood. She wandered about
till she came to a fountain, where, as in a mirror, she saw her own
changed shape, and wept, convulsed with grief. Then hunger began to
attack her--she bent her head, and browsed upon the green grass, which
she was surprised to find tasted very good. She laid herself down on a
bank of moss, but passed the night in extreme terror, hearing the wild
beasts roaring around her, and often forgetting that she was a hind,
trying to save herself by climbing a tree like a human being. Daybreak
reassured her a little; she admired for the first time the wonderful
beauty of dawn; and when the sun rose, it appeared to her such a
marvellous sight that she could not take her eyes from it. She was
strangely comforted, spite of all her misfortune, by the charm that
she found out, every minute more and more, in the new world which now
for the first time she beheld in daylight.
The Fairy Tulip, who loved Désirée, was very sorry for her, although
somewhat offended that the queen had not taken her advice, and
detained the princess safe in her tower till she was fifteen; however,
she would not leave her a prey to the malice of the Fairy of the
Fountain, so contrived invisibly to conduct the faithful Gilliflower
to the place where the poor forlorn hind reposed. As soon as Désirée
saw her, she leaped the stream, and came towards her former companion,
lavishing on her a thousand caresses.
At first Gilliflower was very much astonished to be so taken notice of
by a deer of the forest; but looking at it attentively, she saw two
great tears rolling down from the soft human-like eyes, and some
instinct told her that it was her dear princess. She took the forefeet
of the hind, and kissed them as respectfully as if they had been her
mistress's hands. She spoke to her, and though the hind could not
reply, yet it was clear she understood, for the tears flowed faster
than ever, and she showed, by as much intelligence as a dumb beast
could possibly evince, that she responded to the love of the faithful
girl. When Gilliflower promised that she would never quit her, by a
hundred little signs the poor hind tried to express how happy she was.
They passed the day together, Désirée leading her companion to a place
where she had seen plenty of wild fruits; so that Gilliflower, who was
dying of hunger, became strengthened and refreshed. But when night
came, the girl's terrors returned.
"Dear hind," said she, "where shall we sleep? If we stay here the wild
beasts will devour us; is there no little hut where we can hide?"
The poor hind shook her pretty head, and the tears again began to
flow, almost as if she were a human being. Her tears melted the heart
of the Fairy Tulip, who had watched her invisibly all the time, and
now made herself known--appearing suddenly in a shady alley of the
wood. Gilliflower and the white hind threw themselves at her feet--the
latter licking her hands, and caressing her as prettily as a deer
could--the former imploring her to take pity on the princess, and
restore her to her natural shape.
"I cannot do that," said the fairy; "her enemy has too much power; but
I can shorten her term of punishment, and soften it a little, by
granting that during every night she becomes a woman, though as soon
as day breaks she must again wander about as a hind of the forest."
It was a great comfort to be a woman every night; and the hind showed
her joy by innumerable leaps and bounds, which delighted the good
Tulip.
"Follow this by-path," said she, "and you will find a hut that will
serve you as a quiet home. Farewell."
She disappeared, and Gilliflower, with the hind trotting after her,
went on and on, till she came to a little hut, before which sat an old
woman, making a basket of osiers.
"My good woman," said she, "have you a room to let, for me and my pet
here?"
"Yes, truly," replied the old woman; and took them into a room where
were two little beds, hung with white dimity, with fine white sheets,
and everything as neat and comfortable as possible. As soon as it grew
dark, the princess recovered her own shape, and kissed and embraced a
thousand times her dear Gilliflower, who, on her part, was full of
delight and thankfulness. Then they had their supper, and went to
sleep in their two little beds.
When morning broke, Gilliflower was awakened by a scratching, and
there she saw the hind, just as much a hind as before, waiting to be
let out. The faithful attendant opened the door, and the deer sprang
out quickly, and disappeared in the forest.
Now, by an extraordinary chance, it happened that Prince Warrior,
wandering about, indifferent to where he went, lost himself in this
very forest, where he had come with his companion Becafico. The
latter, seeking for fruits to satisfy their hunger, reached the same
cottage-door where the old woman lived, and being received kindly,
asked her for some food for his master. She put some bread into a
basket, and was going to give it to him, when her charity made her
offer the wanderers shelter for the night.
"It is a poor cottage," said she; "but I have still one empty room,
which will at least save you from being eaten up by wolves and lions."
So the prince was persuaded; and the old woman, who appeared ignorant
of his rank, admitted him and Becafico cautiously, so as not to
disturb the lady and the hind, who occupied the next room. Thus the
two lovers were so near, that they might almost have heard one another
speak, yet did not know it.
The prince rarely slept much; his sorrow was still too great; and when
the first rays of the sun shone through his window, he arose, and
went out into the forest. There he wandered a long time without
finding any sure track: at last he came upon a sort of bower, overhung
with trees, and carpeted with moss, out of which started a beautiful
white hind, who immediately fled away.
Now the prince had formerly been a great hunter, until his passion for
the chase was swallowed up by his love for Désirée; but the old fancy
returned when he saw the white hind. He could not help following her,
and sending after her arrows, not a few, from the bow which he always
carried, causing her almost to die of fear; although, by the care of
the Fairy Tulip, she was not wounded. All through the day he pursued
her; until, towards twilight, she escaped from him towards the
cottage, where Gilliflower was watching in the utmost anxiety. The
faithful girl received tenderly into her arms the poor hind,
breathless, exhausted; and eagerly awaited the moment when her
mistress should become a woman again, and tell her what had happened.
When darkness came on, the deer vanished, and it was the Princess
Désirée who lay on Gilliflower's bosom.
"Alas!" cried she, weeping, "I have more to fear than the Fairy of the
Fountain, and the wild beasts of the forest. I have been pursued all
day by a young hunter, whom I had scarcely seen, before he obliged me
to fly; and sent so many arrows after me that I marvel I was not
killed, or at least wounded."
"My princess, you must never quit this room again," said Gilliflower.
"I must; for the same enchantment which makes me a hind forces me to
do as hinds do. I feel myself every morning irresistibly compelled to
run into the wood, to leap and bound, and eat grass, and behave myself
exactly like a wild creature of the forest. Oh, how weary I am!"
Her soft eyes closed, and she fell asleep until the dawn of day, when
again she was driven out in the shape of a poor four-footed creature,
to fulfil her sad destiny.
The prince on his part came home also very much wearied and vexed.
"Becafico," he said, "I have spent the day in chasing the most
beautiful hind I ever saw. She has slipped from me time after time
with the most wondrous adroitness; yet my arrows were so true that I
marvel how she escaped. At dawn to-morrow I must be after her once
So he did not fail to go, at earliest dawn, to her hiding-place; but
the hind took care not to re-visit her favourite haunt. He sought her
everywhere, and could see nothing; then being very tired and hot, he
gathered some luscious apples which he saw hanging upon a tree over
his head. As soon as he ate them he fell fast asleep.
Meantime the hind, roaming stealthily about, came to the place where
he lay--came quite suddenly, or else she would have taken to flight;
but now seeing her enemy sound asleep, she paused a minute to look at
him; and in his features, wasted with grief, but still so loveable
and beautiful, she recognised the face which had long been engraven on
her heart. The poor hind! she crouched down at a little distance, and
watched him, her eyes beaming with joy. Then she sighed: at length,
become bolder, she approached nearer, and softly touched him with her
fore-foot.
Awaking, what was the prince's surprise to see beside him, tame and
familiar, the pretty creature whom he had hunted all yesterday; but
when he put out his hand to seize her, she fled away like lightning.
He followed with all the speed he could, and thus, she flying and he
pursuing, they passed the whole day. Towards evening her strength
failed; and when the hunter came up to her it was a poor half-dying
deer that he found lying on the grass. She thought her death was
certain--still, from his hands, it did not seem so terrible as from
any one else; but instead of killing her he caressed her.
"Beautiful hind," said he, "do not be afraid. I only wish to take you
home with me, and have you with me always." He cut branches of trees,
wove them ingeniously into a sort of couch, which he strewed with
roses and moss; then took the creature in his arms, laid her gently
down upon them, and sat beside her, feeding her from time to time with
the softest grass he could find. She ate contentedly from his hand,
and he almost fancied she understood all the sweet things he said to
her, and so time passed till it grew dusk.
"My pretty hind," said he, "I will go in search of a stream where you
can drink, and then we will take our way home together." But while he
was absent she stole away, and had only time to reach the cottage when
the transformation happened, and it was not a hind but a weeping
princess who threw herself on the bed beside the faithful Gilliflower.
"I have seen him!" she cried. "My Prince Warrior is himself in this
forest: he was the hunter who has pursued me these two days, and has
taken me at last. But he did not slay me: he saved and caressed me.
Ah, he is gentler and sweeter even than the image in my heart."
Here she began again to weep; but Gilliflower consoled her, and they
went to sleep, wondering much how this adventure would end.
The prince, returning from the stream, missed his beautiful white
hind, and came back to Becafico full of grief, mingled with a certain
anger at the ingratitude of the creature to whom he had been so kind.
But at break of day he rose, determined again to pursue her. She,
however, in order to avoid him, took a quite different route. Still,
the forest was not so large, but that at last he saw her, leaping and
bounding among the bushes. Seized by an irresistible impulse, he shot
an arrow after her; it struck her, she felt a violent pain dart
through one of her slender limbs, and fell helpless on the grass. When
the prince came up to her, he was overcome with remorse for his
cruelty. He took a handful of herbs and bound up her wound, made her a
bed of branches and moss, laid her head upon his knees, and wept over
"My lovely hind," said he, "why did I wound you so cruelly? You will
hate me, when I wish you to love me." So he tended and cherished her
all day, and, towards nightfall, he knotted a ribbon round her neck,
with the intention of gently leading her home. But she struggled with
him; and the struggle was so sore that Gilliflower, coming out in
search of her dear mistress, heard the rustling, and saw her hind in
the hunter's power. She rushed to rescue her, to the prince's great
"Whatever consideration I owe you, madam," said he, "you must know
that you are committing a robbery; this hind is mine."
"No, sir, she is mine," returned Gilliflower, respectfully. "She knows
she is, and will prove it if you will only give her a little liberty.
My pretty pet, come and embrace me." The hind crept into her arms.
"Now kiss me on my right cheek." She obeyed. "Now touch my heart." She
laid her foot against Gilliflower's bosom.
"I allow she is yours," said the prince, discontentedly. "Take her and
go your ways."
But he followed them at a distance, and was very much surprised to see
them enter the cottage. He asked the old woman who the damsel was, but
she said she did not know, except that the lady and the hind lived
there together in solitude, and paid her well. But when Becafico, who
had eyes as sharp as needles, coming to meet his master, by chance
caught sight of Gilliflower, he recognised her at once.
"Here is some great mystery," said he, "for that is the lady who was
the favourite of the Princess Désirée."
"Do not utter that name, which only recalls my grief," said the
prince, sadly; but Becafico, determined to gratify his curiosity, made
all sorts of inquiries, and discovered that Gilliflower was lodged in
the next room.
"I should like to see her again," thought he; "and since only a thin
partition divides us, I will bore a hole through."
He did so, and beheld a wonderful sight. There sat the fairest
princess in all the world, attired in a robe of silver brocade, her
hair falling in long curls, and her eyes sparkling through tears.
Gilliflower knelt before her, binding up her beautiful arm, from which
the blood was flowing.
"Do not heed it," sighed the princess; "better let me die, for death
itself would be sweeter than the life I lead. Alas! how hard it is to
be a hind all day; to see my betrothed, to feel his tenderness and
goodness, yet be unable to speak to him, or to tell him the fatal
destiny which divides me from him."
When Becafico heard this, words cannot describe his astonishment and
delight. He ran towards the prince, who sat moodily at the window.
"Sir," cried he, "only look through this hole, and you will see the
original of the portrait which so fascinated you."
The prince looked, and recognised at once his beloved princess. He
would have died with joy, had he not believed himself deceived by
some enchantment. He knocked at the door, Gilliflower opened it; he
entered, and threw himself at the feet of Désirée. What followed--of
explanations, vows, tears, and embraces--was never very clearly
related, not even by Gilliflower and Becafico, who were present, but
who considerately drew aside, and spent the time in conversing with
one another. So passed the night; and anxiously they awaited for the
dawn, to see whether the beautiful princess would again become a hind
of the forest. But the day broke, grew clearer, brightened into
sunrise, and the princess, with the prince sitting beside her,
remained a beautiful maiden still. Then came a knock at the door, and
there entered the little old woman, who had been such a kind hostess
for all this while.
"The period of enchantment is ended, my children," said she. "Go home
and be happy." And then they knew her as no longer the little old
woman, but the Fairy Tulip, who had thus faithfully watched her
charge.
So the bride and bridegroom returned to their capital, where the
marriage was solemnized with all splendour, and, at Désirée's request,
Longthorn and her mother, who had been imprisoned by the old king's
order, were set free, with no further punishment than banishment to
their own country, where they were to remain for life. As for the
faithful Gilliflower, she stayed at court, with her beloved mistress,
and became the wife of the equally faithful Becafico, who had served
Prince Warrior as devotedly as she the Princess Désirée. The two were
laden with wealth and honours, and shared the happiness of the other
two lovers, which was as great as any mortal could desire. After their
death the story of the White Hind of the Forest was commanded to be
written down in the archives of the state, and thence it has been told
in tradition, or sung in poetry, half over the world.
THE JUNIPER-TREE.
One or two thousand years ago, there was a rich man, who had a
beautiful and pious wife; they loved one another dearly, but they had
no children. They wished and prayed for some night and day, but still
they had none. In front of their house was a yard, where stood a
Juniper-tree, and under it the wife stood once in winter, and peeled
an apple, and as she peeled the apple she cut her finger, and the
blood fell on the snow.
"Oh," said she, sighing deeply and looking sorrowfully at the blood,
"if I only had a child as red as blood, and as white as snow!"
While she spoke, she became quite happy; it seemed to her as if her
wish would surely come to pass. Then she went into the house; and a
month passed, and the snow melted; and two months, and the ground was
green; and three months, and the flowers came up out of the earth; and
four months, and all the trees in the wood burst forth, and the green
twigs all grew thickly together; the little birds sang so that the
whole wood rang, and the blossoms fell from the trees. The fifth month
passed, and she stood under the Juniper-tree, and it smelt so
beautiful, and her heart leaped with joy. She fell upon her knees,
but could not speak. When the sixth month was gone, the fruit was
large and ripe, and she was very quiet; the seventh month, she took
the juniper berries, ate them eagerly, and was sick and sorrowful; and
the eighth month went by, and she called to her husband, and cried and
said, "If I die, bury me under the Juniper-tree."
After this she was quite comforted and happy, till the next month was
passed, and then she had a child as white as snow and as red as blood.
When she beheld it, she was so glad, that she died.
Her husband buried her under the Juniper-tree, and began to mourn very
much; but after a little time, he became calmer, and when he had wept
a little more, he left off weeping entirely, and soon afterwards he
took another wife.
The second wife brought him a daughter, but the child of the first
wife was a little son, and was as red as blood, and as white as snow.
When the wife looked at her daughter, she loved her; but when she
looked at the little boy, she hated him, and it seemed as if he were
always in her way, and she was always thinking how she could get all
the property for her daughter. The Evil One possessed her so, that she
was quite angry with the little boy, and pushed him about from one
corner to another, and cuffed him here and pinched him there, until
the poor child was always in fear. When he came home from school, he
could not find a quiet place to creep into.
Once, when the woman went up to her room, her little daughter came up
too, and said "Mother, give me an apple."
"Yes, my child," said the woman, and gave her a beautiful apple out of
the chest; and the chest had a great heavy lid, with a great sharp
iron lock.
"Mother," said the little daughter, "shall not brother have one too?"
That vexed the woman, but she said, "Yes, when he comes from school."
And when she saw from the window that he was coming, it was just as if
the Evil One came into her, and she snatched away the apple from her
daughter, and said, "You shall not have one before your brother."
Then she threw the apple into the chest, and shut the lid close down.
When the little boy came in at the door, the Evil One made her say
kindly, "My son, will you have an apple?"
Yet she looked so angry all the time, that the little boy said,
"Mother, how dreadful you look! Yes, give me an apple."
Then she felt that she must speak to him. "Come with me," said she,
and opened the lid; "pick out an apple for yourself."
And as the little boy stooped over, the Evil One prompted her, and
smash! she banged the lid down, so that his head flew off and fell
among the red apples. Then she was seized with terror, and thought,
"Can I get rid of the blame of this?" So she went up to her room to
her chest of drawers, and took out of the top drawer a white cloth,
and placed the head on the neck again, and tied the handkerchief
round it, so that one could see nothing, and set him before the door
on a chair, and gave him the apple in his hand.
Soon after, little Margery came to her mother, who stood by the
kitchen fire, and had a pot of hot water before her, which she kept
stirring round.
"Mother," said little Margery, "brother sits before the door, and
looks quite white, and has an apple in his hand; I asked him to give
me the apple, but he did not answer me, and I was frightened."
"Go to him again," said her mother, "and if he will not answer you,
give him a box on the ear."
Then Margery went, and said, "Brother, give me the apple."
But he was silent, so she gave him a box on the ear, and the head fell
down.
She was frightened, and began to cry and sob, and ran to her mother,
and said, "Oh, mother, I have knocked my brother's head off!" and
cried and cried, and would not be comforted.
"Margery," said her mother, "what have you done!--but now be quiet,
and no one will notice; it cannot be helped now--we will cook him in
vinegar."
Then the mother took the little boy, and chopped him in pieces, put
him into the pot, and cooked him in vinegar. But Margery stood by, and
cried and cried, and all her tears fell into the pot, so that the
cookery did not want any salt.
When the father came home, and sat down to dinner, he said, "Where is
my son?"
The mother brought a great big dish of black soup, and Margery cried
and cried without ceasing. Then the father said again, "Where is my
"Oh," said the mother, "he is gone into the country, to see his uncle,
where he is going to stay awhile."
"What does he want there? And he has not even said good-bye to me!"
"Oh, he wished very much to go, and asked if he might remain away six
weeks; he is well taken care of there, you know."
"Well," said the father, "I am sorry; for he ought to have bade me
good-bye."
After that he began to eat, and said, "Margery, what are you crying
for? Brother will be sure to come back. Oh, wife," continued he, "how
delicious this food tastes; give me some more." And the more he ate,
the more he wanted; and he said, "Give me more, you shall not have any
of it; I feel as if it were all mine." And he ate and ate, throwing
the bones under the table, till he had finished it all.
But Margery went to her drawers, and took out of the bottom drawer her
best silk handkerchief, and fetched out all the bones from under the
table; she tied them up in the silk handkerchief, and took them out of
doors, and shed bitter tears over them. Then she laid them under the
Juniper-tree in the green grass; and when she had put them there, she
felt all at once quite happy, and did not cry any more.
Soon the Juniper began to move, and the twigs kept dividing and then
closing, just as if the tree were clapping its hands for joy. After
that there went up from it a sort of mist, and right in the centre of
the mist burnt a fire, and out of the fire flew a beautiful bird, who,
singing deliciously, rose up high in the air. When he was out of
sight, the Juniper-tree was just as it had been before, only the
handkerchief with the bones was gone. But Margery felt quite pleased
and happy, just as if her brother were still alive. And she went back
merrily into the house to dinner.
The bird flew away, sat himself on a goldsmith's house, and began to
sing--
    "My mother, she killed me;
    My father, he ate me;
    My sister, little Margery,
    Gathered up all my bones,
    Tied them in a silk handkerchief,
    And laid them under the Juniper-tree:
    Kywitt! Kywitt! what a beautiful bird am I!"
The goldsmith sat in his workshop, making a gold chain, but he heard
the bird, which sat on his roof, and sang, and he thought it very
beautiful. He stood up, and as he went over the door-step he lost one
slipper. But he went right into the middle of the street, with one
slipper and one sock on; he had on his leather apron; in one hand he
carried the gold chain, and in the other the pincers, while the sun
shone brightly up the street. There he stood, and looked at the bird.
"Bird," said he, "how beautiful you can sing! Sing me that song
"No," said the bird, "I do not sing twice for nothing. Give me that
gold chain, and I will sing it again."
"There," said the goldsmith; "you shall have the gold chain--now sing
me that song once more."
Then the bird came and took the gold chain in his right claw, and went
and sat before the goldsmith, and sang--
Afterwards he flew away to a shoemaker's, and set himself on his roof,
and sang--
When the shoemaker heard it, he ran out of his door in his
shirt-sleeves, looked towards his roof, and had to hold his hand over
his eyes, so that the sun should not dazzle him.
"Bird," said he, "how beautifully you can sing!" And he called in at
his door, "Wife, just come out; there is a bird here which can sing so
beautifully." Then he called his daughter and his workpeople, both
boys and girls; they all came into the street, looked at the bird, and
saw how handsome he was; for he had bright red and green feathers,
and his neck shone like real gold, and his eyes twinkled in his head
like stars.
"Bird," said the shoemaker, "now sing me that song again."
"No," replied the bird, "I do not sing twice for nothing; you must
give me something."
"Wife," said the man, "go to the garret: on the highest shelf there
stands a pair of red shoes--bring them here."
The wife went and fetched the shoes.
"There," said the man, "now sing me that song again."
Then the bird came and took the shoes in his left claw and flew back
on the roof, and sang--
And when he had finished, he flew away, with the chain in his right
claw and the shoes in his left. He flew far away to a mill, and the
mill went "Clipper, clapper, clipper, clapper, clipper, clapper." And
in the mill there sat twenty millers, who chopped a stone, and
chopped, "Hick, hack, hick, hack, hick, hack;" and the mill went,
"Clipper, clapper, clipper, clapper, clipper, clapper."
The bird flew up, and sat in a lime-tree that grew before the mill,
    "My mother, she killed me;"
then one man stopped;
    "My father, he ate me;"
then two more stopped and listened;
    "My sister, little Margery,"
then four more stopped;
    "Gathered up all my bones,
    Tied them in a silk handkerchief,"
now only eight more were chopping,
    "Laid them under"
now only five,
    "the Juniper-tree."
now only one.
    "Kywitt! Kywitt! what a beautiful bird am I!"
Then the last man stopped too, and heard the last word.
"Bird," said he, "how beautifully you sing! Please to sing me that
song once more."
"No," answered the bird, "I do not sing twice for nothing; give me the
millstone, and I will sing it again."
"Yes," said he, "if it belonged to me only, you should have it."
"Yes," cried all the others, "if he sings it again, he shall have it."
Then the bird came down, and all the twenty millers took poles, and
lifted the stone up. The bird stuck his neck through the hole in the
millstone, and put it on like a collar, and flew back to the tree, and
And when he had done singing, he opened his wings, and though he had
in his right claw the chain, in his left the shoes, and round his neck
the millstone, he flew far away to his father's house.
In the room sat the father, the mother, and little Margery at dinner;
and the father said, "Oh, how happy I am! altogether joyful."
"For me," said the mother, "I feel quite frightened, as if a dreadful
storm was coming."
But Margery sat, and cried and cried.
Then there came the bird flying, and as he perched himself on the
roof, "Oh," said the father, "I feel so happy, and the sun shines out
of doors so beautifully! It is just as if I were going to see an old
"No," said the wife; "I am so frightened, my teeth chatter, and it
feels as if there was a fire in my veins;" and she tore open her
dress. But Margery sat in a corner, and cried, holding her apron
before her eyes, till the apron was quite wet through.
The bird perched upon the Juniper-tree, and sang--
Then the mother stopped up her ears, and shut her eyes tight, and did
not want to see or hear; but there was a roaring in her ears like the
loudest thunder, and her eyes burned and flashed like lightning--
"Oh, wife," said the man, "look at that beautiful bird!--he sings so
splendidly. And the sun shines so warm, and there is a smell like
real cinnamon!"
Then Margery laid her head on her knee, and sobbed out loud; but the
man said, "I shall go out--I must look at the bird quite close."
"Oh, do not go," said the wife; "it seems to me as if the whole house
shook, and was in flames."
But the man went out and watched the bird, which still went on
singing--
After that, the bird let the gold chain fall, and it fell right on to
the man's neck, fitting exactly round it. He went in and said, "See
what a beautiful bird that is--it has given me such a splendid gold
chain!"
But the wife was frightened, and fell flat down on the floor, and her
cap dropped off her head.
Then the bird sang again--
"Oh, that I were a thousand feet under the earth, so that I might not
hear!"
    "My father, he ate me,"
Then she fell down, as if she was dead.
"Oh!" said Margery, "I will go out too, and see if the bird will give
me anything."
And the shoes were thrown down.
    "And laid them under the Juniper-tree:
Then Margery was very joyful; she put on the new red shoes, and danced
and jumped about. "Oh," said she, "I was so unhappy when I came out,
and now I am so happy! That is a wonderful bird; he has given me a
pair of red shoes."
"For me," cried the wife, and jumped up, and her hair stood on end
like flames of fire, "I feel as if the world were come to an end; I
will go out--perhaps I shall feel easier."
But as she went out of the door--smash!--the bird threw the millstone
on her head, and she was crushed to pieces.
The father and Margery heard it, and rushed out to see what had
happened: there was a great flame and smoke rising up from the place,
and when that was gone, there stood the little brother all alive
again--as if he had never died. He took his father and Margery by the
hand, and they were all three quite happy, and went into the house to
CLEVER ALICE.
Once upon a time there was a man who had a daughter, who was called
"Clever Alice;" and when she was grown up, her father said, "We must
see about her marrying."
"Yes," replied her mother, "whenever a young man shall appear who is
worthy of her."
At last a certain youth, by name Hans, came from a distance to make a
proposal of marriage but he required one condition, that the Clever
Alice should be very prudent.
"Oh," said her father, "no fear of that! she has got a head full of
brains;" and the mother added, "Ah, she can see the wind blow up the
street, and hear the flies cough!"
"Very well," replied Hans; "but remember, if she is not very prudent,
I will not take her." Soon afterwards they sat down to dinner, and her
mother said, "Alice, go down into the cellar and draw some beer."
So Clever Alice took the jug down from the wall, and went into the
cellar, jerking the lid up and down on her way, to pass away the time.
As soon as she got downstairs, she drew a stool and placed it before
the cask, in order that she might not have to stoop, for she thought
stooping might in some way injure her back, and give it an
undesirable bend. Then she placed the can before her and turned the
tap, and while the beer was running, as she did not wish her eyes to
be idle, she looked about upon the wall above and below. Presently she
perceived, after much peeping into this corner and that corner, a
hatchet, which the bricklayers had left behind, sticking out of the
ceiling right above her head. At the sight of this Clever Alice began
to cry, saying, "Oh! if I marry Hans, and we have a child, and he
grows up, and we send him into the cellar to draw beer, the hatchet
will fall upon his head and kill him;" and so she sat there weeping
with all her might over the impending misfortune.
Meanwhile the good folks upstairs were waiting for the beer, but as
Clever Alice did not come, her mother told the maid to go and see what
she was stopping for. The maid went down into the cellar, and found
Alice sitting before the cask crying heartily, and she asked, "Alice,
what are you weeping about?"
"Ah," she replied, "have I not cause? If I marry Hans, and we have a
child, and he grow up, and we send him here to draw beer, that hatchet
will fall upon his head and kill him."
"Oh," said the maid, "what a clever Alice we have!" And, sitting down,
she began to weep, too, for the misfortune that was to happen.
After a while, when the servant did not return, the good folks above
began to feel very thirsty; so the husband told the boy to go down
into the cellar, and see what had become of Alice and the maid. The
boy went down, and there sat Clever Alice and the maid both crying,
so he asked the reason; and Alice told him the same tale, of the
hatchet that was to fall on her child, if she married Hans, and if
they had a child. When she had finished, the boy exclaimed, "What a
clever Alice we have!" and fell weeping and howling with the others.
Upstairs they were still waiting, and the husband said, when the boy
did not return, "Do you go down, wife, into the cellar and see why
Alice stays so long." So she went down, and finding all three sitting
there crying, asked the reason, and Alice told her about the hatchet
which must inevitably fall upon the head of her son. Then the mother
likewise exclaimed, "Oh, what a clever Alice we have!" and, sitting
down, began to weep as much as any of the rest.
Meanwhile the husband waited for his wife's return; but at last he
felt so very thirsty, that he said, "I must go myself down into the
cellar and see what is keeping our Alice." As soon as he entered the
cellar, there he found the four sitting and crying together, and when
he heard the reason, he also exclaimed, "Oh, what a clever Alice we
have!" and sat down to cry with the whole strength of his lungs.
All this time the bridegroom above sat waiting, but when nobody
returned, he thought they must be waiting for him, and so he went down
to see what was the matter. When he entered, there sat the five crying
and groaning, each one in a louder key than his neighbour.
"What misfortune has happened?" he asked.
"Ah, dear Hans!" cried Alice, "if you and I should marry one another,
and have a child, and he grow up, and we, perhaps, send him down to
this cellar to tap the beer, the hatchet which has been left sticking
up there may fall on his head, and so kill him: and do you not think
this is enough to weep about?"
"Now," said Hans, "more prudence than this is not necessary for my
housekeeping; because you are such a clever Alice, I will have you for
my wife." And, taking her hand, he led her home, and celebrated the
wedding directly.
After they had been married a little while, Hans said one morning,
"Wife, I will go out to work and earn some money; do you go into the
field and gather some corn wherewith to make bread."
"Yes," she answered, "I will do so, dear Hans." And when he was gone,
she cooked herself a nice mess of pottage to take with her. As she
came to the field she said to herself, "What shall I do? Shall I cut
first, or eat first? Ay, I will eat first!" Then she ate up the
contents of her pot, and when it was finished, she thought to herself,
"Now, shall I reap first or sleep first? Well, I think I will have a
nap!" and so she laid herself down amongst the corn, and went to
sleep.
Meanwhile Hans returned home, but Alice did not come, and so he said,
"Oh, what a prudent Alice I have! She is so industrious that she does
not even come home to eat anything." By-and-by, however, evening came
on, and still she did not return; so Hans went out to see how much
she had reaped; but, behold, nothing at all, and there lay Alice fast
asleep among the corn! So home he ran very fast, and brought a net
with little bells hanging on it, which he threw over her head while
she still slept on. When he had done this, he went back again and shut
to the house-door, and, seating himself on his stool, began working
very industriously.
At last, when it was nearly dark, the Clever Alice awoke, and as soon
as she stood up, the net fell all over her hair, and the bells jingled
at every step she took. This quite frightened her, and she began to
doubt whether she were really Clever Alice, and said to herself, "Am I
she, or am I not?" This was a question she could not answer, and she
stood still a long while considering about it. At last she thought she
would go home and ask whether she were really herself--supposing
somebody would be able to tell her. When she came to the house-door it
was shut; so she tapped at the window, and asked, "Hans, is Alice
within?" "Yes," he replied, "she is." At which answer she became
really terrified, and exclaiming, "Ah, heaven, then I am not Alice!"
she ran up to another house, intending to ask the same question. But
as soon as the folks within heard the jingling of the bells in her
net, they refused to open their doors, and nobody would receive her.
So she ran straight away from the village, and no one has ever seen
her since.
Wonderwings
Poppypink sat up in bed and yawned. "Why is everybody getting up so
early?" she asked. "Is it a holiday?"
The older fairies were dressing themselves and brushing their long fine
hair. "Wonderwings is coming to see us," they said. "Jump up, little
Poppypink."
"Who is Wonderwings?" she asked.
"You will see when you are dressed. Hurry, or you will miss her."
[Illustration: "The older fairies were dressing themselves and combing
their long fine hair."]
"Oh dear! I am so sleepy," said Poppypink, and she yawned again. "I
don't care about Wonderwings." She snuggled down into the bedclothes
again, and went to sleep.
Presently she was awakened by the sound of the sweetest singing she had
ever heard, and a flash of brilliant colour went past her window pane of
crystal set in pearl.
"That must be Wonderwings," she said. "Oh, I must see her. I hope I am
not too late."
She sprang from bed and dressed so hurriedly that I am afraid her hair
did not receive its due amount of brushing. Then she ran out into the
The older fairies stood all in a group, saying loudly "I will go," and
"I will go." And before them, scarcely touching the ground with the tip
of her foot, stood poised a glorious fairy, taller than any other there.
She was altogether beautiful; and her wings--as soon as Poppypink saw
them she knew why the visitor had been called Wonderwings. For they
reached high above her head and almost to the ground, and they glowed
with so many colours that it seemed as if a million jewels had been Hung
upon them and had stuck, growing into a million flashing stars that
made a million little rainbows with every sway and movement of her body.
"How lovely! Oh, how lovely!" cried Poppypink. She crept nearer to the
beautiful fairy and sat among the daisies at her feet. "See," she cried.
"My wings are small and colourless. Tell me how I may grow wings like
yours." Just as little girls adore beautiful hair, so do little fairies
adore beautiful wings.
Wonderwings smiled down at her. "Such wings as mine are only to be won
in sadder lands than these," she said. "If you would have them you must
leave your fairyland and come where humans live, and where hunger and
sorrow and death trample the city streets."
"I will come!" cried Poppypink. "I will come!"
"Come then," said Wonderwings. She took the little fairy's hand, and up
they all rose into the clear air, flying far and far away till they left
their fairyland behind and came at last to the sadder lands where humans
lived. There Wonderwings showed them where hunger and sorrow and death
trampled the city streets, and the band of fairies flew lower and lower
to look.
"The children tumble and fight in the dirty lanes, and cry for bread,"
cried Poppypink. "The little ones, I cannot bear to hear them sob."
"Perhaps you can help them," said Wonderwings.
"I am only a little fairy. What can I do?" asked Poppypink. "I have no
bread to give them."
She flew a little lower, to gaze at them more nearly. "What can I do?"
she asked again.
No answer came. She looked around, and found herself alone. Wonderwings
and the older fairies had in a moment gone from sight.
Below, a crippled child sat among rags in a dark corner of a dreary
room, and tears ran down her cheeks. "The sunshine, the pretty yellow
sunshine!" she wailed. "If only I could run and play in the pretty
sunshine!"
"Here is something I can do," thought Poppypink. She gathered armfuls of
the golden sunbeams, and flying with them through the glass as only a
fairy can fly, herself unseen, she heaped them over the twisted hands
and pale thin face of the child, and left her playing with them and
smiling happily.
[Illustration: Poppypink laughed with joy. "I am so glad, so very glad!"
she said. "I had forgotten all about my wings."]
Lower she flew to help the little ones who cried about the gutters. She
led the starving and shelterless to comfort, the toddlers to safety; she
brought a flower to the hopeless, ease to sick ones racked with pain; at
night she flew with glittering dreams from room to room, so that even
sad-eyed feeble babies laughed for pleasure in their sleep. Day after
day, night after night she toiled, for weeks and months and years. There
was so much to do! The time passed like a moment. So busy was she that
she had forgotten all about her wings.
One day there came a flash of colour in the air beside her, and
Wonderwings and all the older fairies stood around her. "Dear
Poppypink," cried one, "how your wings have grown! And how beautiful
they are! They are so tall that they reach above your head and almost to
the ground, and they glow with so many colours that it seems as if a
million jewels had been flung upon them and had stuck, growing into a
million flashing stars that make a million little rainbows with every
sway and movement of your body."
Poppypink laughed with joy. "I am so glad, so very glad!" she said. "I
had forgotten all about my wings."
"Yet they have grown with use," said Wonderwings; "and for every deed of
kindness done a star has sprung, to shine in beauty there for evermore."
[Illustration: The Queen-mother looked over the garden wall. There an
old woman hobbled, muttering to herself.]
The Magic Mirror
There was once a wise old king in a far-off land who said to himself, "I
have a daughter as well as a son; why should she not have a kingdom too?
I will see to it at once."
He called the chief map-maker to him, and said: "Make a map of my
kingdom and divide it by a line so evenly that each part shall be
exactly half. There must not be one hair's breadth more on the east of
the line than on the west."
The chief map-maker worked hard, and soon had the map ready, and it was
divided so evenly that there was not a hair's breadth more on the east
of the line than on the west. Then the king made a law that when he died
the Prince should rule over all the country on one side of the line, and
the Princess should rule over all the country on the other side. The
Prince's land he called Eastroyal, and the Princess's land he called
Westroyal, and from that day to this there have always been kings over
Eastroyal and queens over Westroyal.
But it was soon noticed that in Eastroyal the people became discontented
and quarrelsome and poor, and were always finding fault with the
government; whereas in the west country over the border they were so
happy and kindly that they praised each queen from the beginning of her
reign to the end. Nobody knew why there should be so great a difference,
but a great difference there was. Things grew worse and worse in
Eastroyal, until at last the people rose and turned the reigning king
off his throne and set his little son in his place. "Perhaps we shall be
better satisfied now!" they said.
The new king's mother walked alone, deep in thought; and she was very
troubled. "How can I teach my little son to please his people better
than his father did?" she wondered. "It would break my heart if he too
angered them and lost his crown, yet already he is showing a haughty
temper in his treatment of his lords, and I know not what to do."
"I know! I know!" said a voice.
The Queen-mother was much startled; though she had not spoken aloud, the
words seemed an answer to her thought. She looked over the low wall of
the garden into the road. There an old woman hobbled, leaning on a
stick, and muttering to herself. She was poor and ragged, and bent with
age. "I know, I know!" she said again.
"What do you know?" asked the Queen-mother gently.
The old woman looked up at her. "Go to Westroyal," she said; and she
hobbled away.
"Ah, a witch!" thought the Queen-mother; "and she is right. The Queens
of the West have undoubtedly some secret means of making their people
love them. I will find out what it is."
She prepared for a visit to Westroyal, and arrived a few days later at
the palace of the reigning queen. Here she was welcomed and feasted and
treated right lovingly, but though she kept her eyes and her ears as
wide open as it was possible for eyes and ears to be, she could not
discover the secret. She grew sad with disappointment.
The young queen saw that she was sorrowful. "You are not happy here.
What is the matter?" she asked. "What can I do to make you glad?"
The Queen-mother held out her hands imploringly. "Only give me your
secret," she begged. "Tell me how you gain the love of your people and
keep it through all the years. Tell me so that I may teach my young son
how to hold his throne?"
"Is that all?" exclaimed the Queen. "Come, I will show you."
[Illustration: "She led the way to her own lovely sleeping-chamber."]
She led the way to her own lovely sleeping-chamber, hung with rose silk
and panelled with polished silver and amethyst, and she pointed to a
great mirror set strongly into the wall. "Look within!" she said.
Wonderingly, the Queen-mother obeyed. On the surface of the mirror the
faces and forms of herself and the young queen were reflected; but
after a few moments, as she gazed, these faded away, and in their places
came a picture of a mine, with blackened toilers filling tracks with
coal. That, too, faded, and a golden cornfield showed upon the polished
glass; under the hot summer sun the busy reapers moved, wiping the sweat
from their brows when they stopped a moment to rest. A third picture was
of weavers making cloth. A cottage home came next, and a lordly mansion
of the rich, and a homeless child seeking shelter under a city bridge.
So scene followed scene, beautiful, or sad, or sordid, sometimes wild
and violent, and sometimes gay and peaceful, showing in the main a
people happy and content.
"What is it?" asked the amazed Queen-mother at last. "How come these
pictures here?"
"They are the life of my state reflected on this magic mirror for my
help," replied the Queen. "Long ago, when the first queen came to rule
the new kingdom of Westroyal, the fairies brought this mirror and set it
in the wall as here you see it. Faithfully ever since it has reflected
the daily happenings through-out the land, the people's toil and
pleasures, their dangers and their comforts and rewards. So each queen
has known her country. Your son, looking in his mirror, sees but
himself; I see the sufferings of my people and know what things they
need, and so plainly are these pictures set before me that I cannot rest
till I have used my power to give relief."
"Oh!" cried the Queen-mother, "now I see why you are loved. How can I
get such a mirror for my son?"
"That I know not," replied the Queen.
Then the Queen-mother returned sad at heart to the kingdom of her son,
pondering on what she had seen.
Once again she walked in her garden alone. "How shall I get such a
mirror?" she wondered. "What should I do?"
As once before, a voice replied "I know! I know!"
The Queen-mother looked over the garden wall. Hobbling along the road
was the old woman who had bade her go to Westroyal. "You who helped me
before, help me again!" cried the Queen-mother. "I have obeyed you. How
now shall I get a magic mirror for my son?"
The old woman looked up at her. "Go to the Deeps," she said, and she
hobbled off.
Now this was a dreadful command to the Queen-mother, for the Deeps was a
horrible black pool in the roughest and most dangerous part of the
country. It was said to be formed of the country's tears and to be also
bottomless, and to be haunted by beings of strange shape. There were
stories of their mysterious power and evil ways. Yet go she must, if
going meant the gaining of a magic mirror for her son. And she must go
alone, for only so could any seeker find the pathway to the pool, so it
was said.
"I will go at once, before my courage fails," she said, and she left her
sheltered garden and set off across the land.
She had many weary miles to travel, past villages and towns and fields,
and she was footsore and faint when at last she reached the winding
track that led between the darkening hills. Yet on she went, following
the murmur of a tiny stream that dropped through thick-set bushes into a
shadowed valley. On she went still, and now the darkness came, and she
had lost her way. She stumbled over fallen logs, pushed with bleeding
hands and torn clothes through bramble wildernesses, and found at last
her way again to the narrow track beside the little stream that murmured
in the dark.
On she went, and down. The stream suddenly widened into a round
blackness open to the sky, but walled in by jagged rocks. It was the
pool. Utterly spent through weariness and fear, she sank down among the
rocks to rest, and waited there for what might come to her.
Strange rustlings sounded round the rocks, strange forms loomed close
beside her, strange voices asked her: "What are you? Why come you to our
haunts?" Though her heart was sick with dread she answered boldly in a
firm clear voice. "Give me a magic mirror for my son, that he may learn
to rule."
There was a flash, and the pool and all the rocks were lit by a light
brighter and softer than that of moon or stars. All round her stood the
beings who had loomed so strangely in the darkness. They were fairies,
exquisite in shape and fineness, robed in flowing gossamer of many
colours. They smiled at her, and touched her with their gentle hands,
and immediately she was well. "Your love has brought you nobly through
much fear and hurt," they said. "You shall have your due reward. Look
into the Deeps."
[Illustration: She rose into the air a shining queen of fairies, holding
in her hands a tiny gleaming mirror.]
One took her hand and led her to the edge, and the Queen-mother,
fearless and smiling now, looked down into the fathomless water of the
pool. As she gazed, ripples came upon its surface. They broke away into
shining cascades of diamonds and pearls, and between them appeared the
face and shoulders of the old woman of the road. "I have your magic
mirror," she cried. "It is formed of the lowest teardrops of the Deeps."
She sprang out and trod the water to the shore, and as she went her rags
fell from her and she rose into the air a shining queen of fairies, more
beautiful than any other there, holding in her hand a tiny gleaming
mirror. "Come," she said, "let us set it in its place."
She touched the Queen-mother's hand, and in a flash they were all at the
palace, within the young king's sleeping chamber of turquoise and gold.
There as he lay asleep the fairies set the mirror in its place with
magic words, and as it touched the wall it lengthened out and widened
till it stood as large as that of the young queen across the border
line. Over the polished glass began to float the pictures of the
country's life. "How can I show my gratitude?" the Queen-mother asked;
but the fairies were gone.
Next morning when the little king awoke he ran to see the fine new
mirror in his room. He gazed and gazed upon the strange entrancing
pictures that came on it, and every day he spent long hours at the
mirror. And as he learned to recognise the hardships and the sufferings
of his people his heart grew hot to give relief, and he was no more
haughty, but used his power to ease their woes. So in Eastroyal as in
Westroyal there was content, and the people loved their king and praised
him through all his days until the end. And all the kings who followed
after him ruled wisely and were loved.
[Illustration: "Look closely at my flowers," she said, "and tell me
which you think most beautiful."]
Fairy Tenderheart.
Little Fairy Tenderheart was weeping. She sat on a ledge that overlooked
the world, and her tears fell fast. In twos and threes her sisters flew
from Fairyland to put their arms about her, but none could comfort her.
"Come, dance and sing with us and forget your grief," they said. She
shook her head. "The terrible fighting!" she said. "See where far below
men rage, killing each other. Rivers run red with blood, and the sorrow
of weeping women rises through the air to where I sit. How can I dance
and sing?"
"It is the world at war," said an older fairy sadly. "I too have wept in
earlier days when men have fought. But our tears are wasted, little
sister. Come away."
Fairy Tenderheart looked eagerly at her. "You who have watched the world
so many years," she said, "tell me why such dreadful deeds are done down
The older fairy bent her eyes on the blackened plains of earth. "I
cannot tell you that," she slowly said. "We watch and pity, but we
cannot know what works in the hearts of men that they should gather in
their millions to destroy their brothers and themselves. No other
creature turns on its own kind and kills so terribly as man."
[Illustration: In twos and threes her sisters flew from Fairyland to put
their arms about her, but none could comfort her.]
"What can we do? It must be stopped. What can we do?"
"We can do nothing, little sister. See where the women of the world
stretch out their hands, imploring men to live in peace. They beg the
lives of fathers, husbands, sons; they point to ruined homes and
desolated lands. 'War wrecks our lives!' they cry. Yet even for those
they love men will not give up battle. What, then, can fairies do? Tears
are useless. Come away."
"I must stay here. I must think of something I can do," said Fairy
Tenderheart; and she would not go.
Her tears had stopped. She searched with anxious eyes across the world
to find some means of helping men to better things, but no way could she
find. And still the fighters shot and stabbed, and the dying and the
dead lay piled upon the fields.
Another fairy flew to her. "Come away, little sister!" she said. "I
cannot bear to see you sorrowing. Come, or you will forget the merry
ways of Fairyland and grow like the Oldest Fairy of All, who spends her
life brooding over this dreary earth."
Fairy Tenderheart sprang up. "Where is she? Tell me where to find her.
Why did I not know of her before? I will go to her that we may be
companions in our sorrow. Perhaps together we may find a way to help."
"Ah, do not go. Listen! She is so old that she has watched the world
since the beginning of wars, yet, as you see, she has found no way of
stopping them. How then can you?"
"I must go."
"She left our joyful Fairyland for a Magic Garden, and whoever enters
that Garden can never come back to us. There she dwells for ever alone,
at work or in thought, or preparing for her mysterious journeys to the
earth. Do not go, or you too will be cut off from our life of dance and
song, never to return."
"I will go. Tell me the way."
The fairy flew off. "I will not tell you," she said. "You shall not go."
"I will go," said Fairy Tenderheart again. With steadfast steps she
searched through Fairyland until she found a narrow track that led
between the winding mountains and far out across wide, shimmering
plains. This track she followed till she came upon the Magic Garden.
The Oldest Fairy of All sat thinking among her flowers, and her eyes
were filled with peace. She looked at Fairy Tenderheart standing at the
gate. "Who enters here can never return to Fairyland," she said, and her
voice was sweeter than the songs of birds.
Fairy Tenderheart pushed open the gate and stepped within the Garden.
"Who enters here finds joy," said the Oldest Fairy of All, and a crown
of happiness sat on her hair.
"You come to work?" she asked.
"I come to learn what I may do to help the suffering earth," said Fairy
Tenderheart. "Its cries of agony have beaten on my heart until there was
no rest for me in Fairyland. Is there no way to make war cease? I come
to you for wisdom."
The Oldest Fairy of All rose up and smiled, and her face was brighter
than the moon and stars. "Look closely at my flowers," she said, "and
tell me which you think most beautiful."
The flowers bloomed on every side, in every lovely hue--crimson and gold
and orange, blue and purple and pink and softest lavender. All were
scented, and all were beautiful; but there was one plant that pleased
the little fairy more than any other. It grew no taller than the rest,
made no great show of colour, yet through its stems and leaves there
shone a radiance as if a light hid in them. Its flowers were clear as
crystal--one could see quite through them--but the sunlight falling on
them was broken into glowing colours, so that every blossom was a little
bunch of flashing rainbows. And where the flowers had closed and grown
to fruit they hung golden as the sun and fragrant with a scent that
stole upon the wind and made the heart heat high with happiness.
"This is the most beautiful," said Fairy Tenderheart.
"You have chosen well," said the Oldest Fairy of All. "You are fitted to
help me in my work. That is the Plant of Knowledge; its crystal
blossoms are called the Flowers of Understanding, and its fruit is Love.
By it alone can war be made to cease."
She pointed far below. "I have planted it upon the earth in many spots,"
she said. "Here and there it has flourished and spread, and its fruit
has sweetened all the air. But, alas!" her eyes grew sad, "too often it
has been trampled under foot and killed, and war has broken out afresh.
If only men would care for it and let it grow the world would soon be
wrapped in peace."
"Can we not plant more and more until it spreads across the world in
spite of all neglect?" asked Fairy Tenderheart.
The Oldest Fairy shook her head. "I have done my best," she said; "but
while men tramp it down it cannot spread across the world. Even when it
has grown well it cannot do the good it ought to do: a nation which has
eaten of its Fruit of Love and has learned to scorn the littleness of
war is yet forced by that same Love to fight, that it may rescue a weak
and helpless country from the greedy clutches of those who have refused
to let my dear plant bloom. In the end it shall spread, no doubt, and
my work shall be complete; but the time is long, the time is long."
She mused, and Fairy Tenderheart gazed thoughtfully upon the earth.
Presently she raised her eyes, and they were bright with hope.
[Illustration: "In the children's gardens ... they planted the seeds."]
"See where a group of children gathers round your precious plant!" she
said. "How eagerly they stretch their hands towards it, and how they
look into its flashing flowers. They will never tread it in the mud, for
they have seen its splendour. Let me take seeds to all the children's
gardens in the world. The Children! They will welcome your Plant of
Knowledge with its Flowers of Understanding, and when they have tasted
its Fruit of Love they will grow up scorning war, and the world will
live in peace."
The Oldest Fairy laughed with joy. "Oh, little sister, you have come to
help indeed!" she said. "You are right. The Children! It is to them we
must take our plant. Come, let us gather seeds and start at once."
They gathered the golden seeds and carried them swiftly down. In the
children's gardens across the world they planted them, and everywhere
the children ran to gaze at the wonder of the springing plants, and to
watch the flowers unclose. And when through later days they ate and ate
again of the fragrant golden fruit, Love filled their veins and they
became a new race, scorning the littleness of war. And the world was
wrapped in peace.
Stan Bolovan.
Once upon a time, something happened. If it hadn't happened, it
wouldn't be told.
At the edge of the village, where the peasants' oxen break through the
hedges and the neighbors' hogs wallow in the ground under the fences,
there once stood a house. In this house lived a man, and the man had a
wife; but the wife grieved all day long.
"What troubles you, dear wife, that you sit there drooping like a
frost-bitten bud in the sunlight?" her husband asked one day. "You
have all you need. So be cheerful, like other folks."
"Let me alone, and ask no more questions!" replied the wife, and
became still more melancholy than before.
Her husband questioned her the second time, and received the same
reply. But, when he asked again, she answered more fully.
"Dear me," she said, "why do you trouble your head about it? If you
know, you'll be just sorrowful as I am. It's better for me not to tell
But, to this, people will never agree. If you tell a person he must
sit still, he is more anxious to move than ever. Stan was now
determined to know what was in his wife's mind.
"If you are determined to hear, I'll tell you," said the wife.
"There's no luck in the house, husband,--there's no luck in the
house!"
"Isn't the cow a good one? Are not the fruit-trees and bee-hives full?
Are not the fields fertile?" asked Stan. "You talk nonsense, if you
complain of any thing."
"But, husband, we have no children."
Stan understood; and, when a man realizes such a thing, it isn't well.
From this time, a sorrowful man and a sorrowful woman lived in the
house on the edge of the village. And they were sorrowful because the
Lord had given them no children. When the wife saw her husband sad,
she grew still more melancholy; and the more melancholy she was, the
greater his grief became.
This continued for a long time.
They had masses repeated and prayers read in all the churches. They
questioned all the witches, but God's gift did not come.
One day, two travelers arrived at Stan's house, and were joyfully
received and entertained with the best food he had. They were angels
in disguise; and, perceiving that Stan and his wife were good people,
one of them, while throwing his knapsack over his shoulder to continue
his journey, asked his host what he most desired, and said that any
three of his wishes should be fulfilled.
"Give me children," replied Stan.
"What else shall I give you?"
"Children, sir, give me children!"
"Take care," said the angel, "or there will be too many of them. Have
you enough to support them?"
"Never mind that, sir,--only give them to me!"
The travelers departed; but Stan accompanied them as far as the
high-road, that they might not lose their way among the fields and
When Stan reached home again, he found the house, yard, and garden
filled with children, in all not less than a hundred. Not one was
larger than the other; but each was more quarrelsome, bolder, more
mischievous and noisier than the rest. And, in some way, God made Stan
feel and know that they all belonged to him and were his.
"Good gracious! What a lot of them!" he cried, standing in the midst
of the throng.
"But not too many, husband," replied his wife, bringing a little flock
with her.
Then followed days which can only be experienced by a man who has a
hundred children. The house and village echoed with shouts of "father"
and "mother," and the world was full of happiness.
But taking care of children isn't so simple a matter. Many pleasures
come with many troubles, and many troubles with many joys. When, after
a few days, the children began to shout, "Father, I'm hungry!" Stan
began to scratch his head. There did not seem to him to be too many
children, for God's gift is good, however large it may be; but his
barns were too small, the cow was growing thin, and the fields did
not produce enough.
"I'll tell you what, wife," said Stan one day, "it seems to me that
there isn't much harmony in our affairs. As God was good enough to
give us so many children, He ought to have filled the measure of His
goodness, and sent us food for them, too."
"Search for it, husband," the wife answered. "Who knows where it may
be concealed? The Lord never does a thing by halves."
Stan went out into the wide world to find God's gift. He was firmly
resolved to return home laden with food.
Aha! The road of the hungry is always a long one. A man doesn't earn
food for a hundred greedy children in a trice. Stan wandered on, on,
on, till he had fairly run himself off his feet. When he had thus
arrived nearly at the end of the world, where what is mixes with what
is not, he saw in the distance, in the middle of a field which lay
spread out as flat as a cake, a sheep-fold. By it stood seven
shepherds, and in the shadow within lay a flock of sheep.
"Lord, help me," said Stan, and went up to the fold to see whether, by
patience and discretion, he might not find some employment there. But
he soon discovered that there was not much more hope here than in the
other places whither he had journeyed. This was the state of affairs:
every night, at precisely twelve o'clock, a furious dragon came and
took from the herd a ram, a sheep, and a lamb, three animals in all.
He also carried milk enough for seventy-seven lambkins to the old
she-dragon, that she might bathe in it and grow young. The shepherds
were very angry about it, and complained bitterly. So Stan saw that he
was not likely to return home from here richly laden with food for his
But there is no spur more powerful than for a man to see his children
starving. An idea entered Stan's head, and he said boldly, "What would
you give me, if I released you from the greedy dragon?"
"One of each three rams shall be yours, one-third of the sheep, and
one-third of the lambs," replied the shepherds.
"Agreed," said Stan; yet he felt rather anxious, lest he might find it
too hard to drive the flock home alone.
But there was no hurry about that. It was some time before midnight.
And besides, to tell the truth, Stan did not exactly know how he was
to get rid of the dragon. "The Lord will send me some clever plan," he
said to himself, and then counted the flock again to see how many
animals he would have.
Just at midnight, when day and night, weary of strife, for a moment
stood still, Stan felt that he was about to see something he had never
beheld before. It was something that can not be described. It is a
horrible thing to have a dragon come. It seemed as if the monster was
hurling huge rocks at the trees, and thus forcing a way through
primeval forests. Even Stan felt that he should be wise to take the
quickest way off, and enter into no quarrel with a dragon. Ah! but his
children at home were starving.
"I'll kill you or you shall kill me!" Stan said to himself, and
remained where he was, close by the sheep-fold.
"Stop!" he cried, when he saw the dragon near the fold; and he shouted
as though he was a person of importance.
"H'm," said the dragon: "where did you come from, that you screech at
me so?"
"I am Stan Bolovan, who at night devours rocks and by day grazes on
the trees of the primeval forests; and if you touch the flock, I'll
cut a cross on your back, and bathe you in holy water."
When the dragon heard these words, he stopped in the midst of his
career; for he saw that he had found his match.
"But you must first fight with me," replied the dragon, hesitatingly.
"I fight with you?" cried Stan. "Beware of the words that have
escaped your lips. My breath is stronger than your whole body." Then,
taking from his knapsack a piece of white cheese, he showed it to the
dragon. "Do you see this stone?" he said. "Pick one up from the bank
of yonder stream, and we'll try our strength."
The dragon took a stone from the shore of the brook.
"Can you squeeze buttermilk out of the stone?" asked Stan.
The dragon crushed the stone in his hand, so that he crumbled it into
powder. But he squeezed no buttermilk from it.
"It can't be done," he said rather angrily.
"I'll show you whether it can be done," replied Stan, and then
squeezed the soft cheese in his hand, till the buttermilk trickled
down between his fingers.
When the dragon saw this, he began to look about him to find the
shortest road to run away; but Stan placed himself before the forest.
"Let us have a little reckoning about what you have taken from the
fold," he said. "Nothing is given away here."
The poor dragon would have taken flight, if he hadn't been afraid that
Stan might blow behind him, and bury him under the trees in the
forest. So he stood still, like a person who doesn't know what else to
"Listen!" he said, after a while. "I see that you are a useful man. My
mother has long been looking for a servant like you, but has not been
able to find one. Enter our service. The year has three days, and each
day's wages is seven sacks of ducats!"
Three times seven sacks of ducats! A fine business! That was just what
Stan needed. "And," he thought, "if I've outwitted the dragon, I can
probably get the better of his mother!" So he didn't waste many words
about the matter, but set off with the monster. A long, rough road;
but still it was too short, since it led to a bad end. It seemed to
Stan as if he had arrived almost before he started.
The old she-dragon, old as Time itself, was waiting for them. She had
made a fire under the huge caldron, in which she meant to boil the
milk and mix it with the blood of a lamb and the marrow from its
bones, that the liquid might have healing power. Stan saw her eyes
glistening in the darkness when they were still three gun-shots off.
But, when they reached the spot and the she-dragon perceived that her
son had brought her nothing, she was very angry. This she-dragon was
by no means lovable. She had a wrinkled face, open jaws, tangled hair,
sunken eyes, parched lips, and a breath reeking with the smell of
onions.
"Stay here," said the dragon. "I'll go and make arrangements with my
mother."
Stan would willingly have stood still further off, but he had no
choice now that he had once entered upon this evil business. So he let
the dragon go on.
"Listen, mother!" said the dragon, when he had entered the house.
"I've brought you a man to get rid of. He's a terrible fellow, who
eats pieces of rock and squeezes buttermilk out of stones." Then he
told her what had happened.
"Just leave him to me," she said, after hearing the whole story. "No
man ever slipped through my fingers."
So the matter remained as it had first been settled. Stan Bolovan
became the servant of this monster and his mother. A terrible fix! I
really don't know what will come of it.
The next day, the she-dragon gave him his task. They were to give a
signal to the dragon world with a club sheathed in seven thicknesses
of iron. The dragon raised the club and hurled it three miles, then he
set off with Stan, that he might also throw it three miles, or, if
possible, further still. When Stan reached the club, he began to look
at it rather anxiously. He saw that he and all his children together
could not even lift it from the ground.
"Why are you standing there?" asked the dragon.
"Why, you see, it's such a handsome club. I'm sorry," replied Stan.
"Sorry? Why?" inquired the dragon.
"Because," answered Stan, "I'm afraid you'll never see it again in
your whole life, if I throw it; for I know my own strength."
"Don't fear. Just throw it," replied the dragon.
"If you really mean it, we'll first go and get provisions enough to
last three days; for we shall have to travel at least three days, if
not longer, to get it."
These words frightened the dragon, but he did not yet believe that it
would be so bad as Stan said. So they went home for the provisions,
though he wasn't at all pleased with the idea of having Stan serve his
year in merely going after the club. When they got back again to it,
Stan sat down on the bag of provisions and became absorbed in staring
at the moon.
"What are you doing?" asked the dragon.
"Only waiting for the moon to sail by."
"Don't you see that the moon is directly in my way?" said Stan. "Or do
you want me to fling the club into the moon?"
The dragon now began to be seriously anxious. It was a club that had
descended to him from his ancestors, and he wouldn't have liked to
lose it in the moon.
"I'll tell you what," he said. "Don't throw the club. I'll do it
myself."
"Certainly not. Heaven forbid!" replied Stan. "Only wait till the moon
passes by."
Then a long conversation followed; for Stan would not consent to have
the dragon throw the club again, except on the promise of seven sacks
of ducats.
"Oh, dear! mother, he's a tremendously strong man," said the dragon.
"I could scarcely prevent him from throwing the club into the moon."
The she-dragon began to be anxious, too. Just think of it! Would it be
a joke to have a person able to throw any thing into the moon? She was
a she-dragon of true dragon blood, however, and the next day had
thought of a still harder task.
"Bring some water," she said early in the morning, and gave each
twelve buffalo skins, ordering them to fill them by evening, and fetch
them all home at once.
They went to the well; and, before one could wink, the dragon had
filled the twelve skins, and was in the act of carrying them back.
Stan was tired, he had scarcely been able to drag the empty skins
along. A chill ran through his veins, when he thought of the full
ones. What do you suppose he did? He pulled a worn-out knife blade
from his belt, and began to scratch the earth around the well with it.
"I'm not a blockhead, that I should go to the labor of filling the
skins with water," replied Stan.
"But how will you carry the water to the house, then?"
"How? Just as you see," said Stan. "I'm going to take the well, you
goose!"
The dragon stood with his mouth wide-open in amazement. He wouldn't
have had this done on any account, for the well was one that had
belonged to his ancestors.
"I'll tell you," he said anxiously, "let me carry your skins home,
"Certainly not. Heaven forbid!" replied Stan, digging on around the
Now, another long discussion followed; and this time, too, the dragon
could only persuade Stan by promising him seven sacks of ducats.
On the third day, that is the last one, the she-dragon sent them into
the forest for wood.
Before one could count three, the dragon tore up more trees than Stan
had ever seen before in his whole life, and piled them up together.
But Stan began to examine the trees, chose the very finest, climbed up
into one and tied its top with a wild grape-vine to the next. So,
without saying a word, he continued to fasten one splendid tree to
"What are you doing there?" asked the dragon.
"You see what I am doing," replied Stan, working quietly on.
"Why are you tying the trees together?"
"Why, to save myself unnecessary work in pulling them up one by one,"
said Stan.
"But how are you going to carry them home?"
"I shall take the whole forest, you goose! Can't you understand that?"
said Stan, continuing to fasten them together.
The dragon now felt as if he wanted to take to his heels, and never
stop until he reached home.
But he was afraid that he should suddenly find Stan pulling the whole
forest down on his head.
This time, as it was the end of the year's service, it seemed as if
the discussion would never cease. Stan did not want to listen at all,
but had set his mind upon flinging the forest on his back at any rate.
"I'll tell you what," said the dragon, trembling with fear, "your
wages shall be seven times seven sacks of ducats. Content yourself
with that."
"Well, be it so, as I see you are a good fellow," replied Stan, and
agreed that the dragon should carry the wood for him.
The year was now over. Stan was anxious only about one things--how he
was to drag so many ducats home.
In the evening, the dragon and his mother sat talking together in
their room; but Stan listened in the entry.
"Woe betide us!" said the dragon: "this fellow upsets us terribly.
Give him money, even more than he has, only let us get rid of him."
Ah, yes! but the she-dragon cared for money.
"Let me tell you one thing," she said: "you must kill this man
to-night."
"I am afraid of him, mother," he answered in terror.
"Have no fear," replied his mother. "When you see that he is asleep,
take your club and strike him in the middle of the forehead."
So it was agreed. Ah, yes! but Stan always had a bright idea at the
right time. When he saw that the dragon and his mother had put out the
light, he took the pig's trough, and laid it bottom upward in his
place, covered it carefully with a shaggy coat, and lay down himself
under the bed, where he began to snore like a person who is sound
The dragon went out softly, approached the bed, raised his club, and
struck one blow on the spot where Stan's head ought to have been. The
trough sounded hollow, Stan groaned, and the dragon tiptoed back
Stan then crept out from under the bed, cleaned it, and lay down, but
was wise enough not to close an eye all night long.
The dragon and his mother were rigid with amazement when they saw Stan
come in the next morning as sound as an egg.
"Good morning!"
"Good morning; but how did you sleep last night?"
"Very well," replied Stan. "Only I dreamed that a flea bit me just
here on the forehead, and it seems as if it still pained me."
"Just listen to that, mother!" cried the dragon. "Did you hear? He
talks about a flea, and I hit him with my club!"
This was too much for the she-dragon. She perceived that it isn't
worth while to argue with such people. So they hastened to fill his
sacks, in order to get rid of him as quickly as possible. But poor
Stan now began to perspire. When he stood beside the bags, he trembled
like an aspen leaf, because he was unable to lift even one of them
from the ground. So he stood staring at them.
"H'm! I'm waiting," replied Stan, "because I would rather stay with
you another year. I'm ashamed to have any body see me carry away so
little at one time. I'm afraid people will say, 'Look at Stan Bolovan,
who in one year has grown as weak as a dragon.'"
Now, it was the two dragons' turn to be frightened.
They vainly told him that they would give him seven--nay, three times
seven or even seven times seven--sacks of ducats, if he would only go
"I'll tell you what," said Stan, at last. "As I see you don't want to
keep me, I won't force you to do so. Have it your own way. I'll go.
But, that I need not be ashamed before the people, you must carry this
treasure home for me."
The words were scarcely out of his mouth, when the dragon picked up
the sacks and set off with Stan.
Short and smooth, yet always too long, is the road that leads home.
But, when Stan found himself close to his house, and heard his
children's shouts, he began to walk slower. It seemed too near; for he
was afraid that, if the dragon knew where he lived, he might come to
take away the treasure. Only he was puzzled to find any way of
carrying his money home alone.
"I really don't know what to do," he said, turning to the dragon. "I
have a hundred hungry children, and fear you may fare badly among
them, because they are very fond of fighting. But just behave
sensibly, and I'll protect you as well as I can."
A hundred children! That's no joke! The dragon--though a dragon of
dragon race--let the bags fall in his fright. But, from sheer terror,
he picked them up again. Yet his fear did not gain the mastery till
they entered the court-yard. When the hungry children saw their father
coming with the loaded dragon, they rushed toward him, each one with a
knife in the right hand and a fork in the left. Then they all began to
whet the knives on the forks, shrieking at the top of their lungs, "We
want dragon meat!"
This was enough to scare Satan himself. The dragon threw down the
sacks, and then took to flight, so frightened that since that time he
has never dared to come back to the world.
The Wonderful Bird.
Once upon a time, something happened. If it had not happened, it would
not be told.
There was a good, pious emperor, who had three sons. Among many other
benefits bestowed upon the inhabitants of his empire he built a
church, about which marvelous stories were told, for he adorned it
with gold, precious stones and every thing the workmen of that country
regarded as beautiful and valuable. Within and in front of this church
were numbers of marble columns, and it was supplied with the finest
paintings, silver chandeliers, huge silver lamps, and the rarest
books. The more the emperor rejoiced in its beauty, the more sorrowful
he felt that he could not finish it, for the steeple continually fell
"How is it that this sacred church can not be completed?" he asked. "I
have spent all my property and it is not yet done." So he ordered a
proclamation to be sent throughout the empire, stating that any
architect who could finish the church steeple would receive great
gifts and honors. Besides this, a second proclamation was issued,
commanding prayers to be read and services held in all the churches,
that God might take pity on him and send him a good architect. The
third night the monarch dreamed that if any one would fetch the
wonderful bird from the other shore and put its nest in the steeple,
the church could be finished. He told this dream to his sons, and they
vied with each other in offering to set out and devote themselves to
their imperial father's service.
The emperor replied: "I see, my sons, that you all desire to fulfill
your duty to God, but you can't all three go at once. My oldest son
shall set out first, if he does not succeed, the second one, and so on
until the Lord takes pity upon us."
The younger sons silently submitted; the oldest one made his
preparations for the journey. He traveled as best he could, and when
he had passed the frontiers of his father's empire, found himself in a
beautiful grove. After lighting a fire he stood waiting until his food
was cooked. Suddenly he saw a fox, which begged him to tie up his
hound, give it a bit of bread and a glass of wine, and let it rest by
his fire. Instead of granting the request the prince released the
hound, which instantly pursued the animal, whereupon the fox, by a
magic spell, transformed the emperor's son into a block of stone.
When the sovereign saw that his oldest son did not return, he listened
to the entreaties of his second son, and gave him permission to set
forth to find the wonderful bird. After making his preparations and
taking some provisions with him, this prince also departed. On the
spot where his brother had been turned to stone, the same thing
happened to him, because he also refused the fox's entreaties, and
tried to catch it, to get its skin.
The emperor grew very thoughtful, when after a long time his sons
failed to return, either with or without the wonderful bird.
At last the youngest said: "You see, father, it is now a long time
since my brothers set out to find the wonderful bird, and they haven't
come home yet; give me some money and clothes for the journey that I
may try my luck also. If I succeed, you will rejoice, because your
dream will be fulfilled, and if I do not, you will suffer no
mortification from it."
"Your older brothers have apparently been unable to get this wonderful
bird," replied the emperor; "nay, perhaps they have even lost their
lives, they have been absent so long. I am old; if you go too, who
will help me in the cares of government; if I die, who is there to
ascend the throne except you, my son? Stay here, my dear child, do not
leave me."
"You know, my royal father, that I have never swerved a hair's breadth
from your commands, and if I now venture to urge my petition it is
only because, if possible, I would fain fulfill a wish that gives you
no rest, which you have cherished so many years and striven to realize
at so great a cost."
After many entreaties, the emperor yielded. The prince chose from the
imperial stables a horse that pleased him, took a dog for a
companion, supplied himself with sufficient food and departed.
After some time had passed, the emperor's two older sons suddenly
arrived with the magic bird and a young girl, who was placed in charge
of the poultry-yard. Every body wondered at the beauty of the bird,
whose plumage glittered with a thousand hues, each feather shining
like the sun, and the church-steeple did not fall after the bird and
its nest were placed within. One thing, however, was noticed; the bird
seemed dumb, it never uttered a note, and all who saw it grieved that
so beautiful a creature should have no song; even the emperor, spite
of all the pleasure he took in the church and steeple, was sorrowful
because the bird did not sing.
People began to forget the youngest son, so great was the rejoicing
over the bird that seemed to keep the steeple from falling, and thus
enabled the workmen to finish the church; but the emperor grieved
because the prince was not there to share his subjects' pleasure.
One day the poultry-keeper came to him and said: "May thy face shine,
mighty emperor, the whole city is marveling at the singing of the
magic bird--a shepherd entered the church early this morning, and the
bird instantly began to sing as if it would burst its throat, and is
so happy that it can hardly keep in its nest. This has happened to-day
for the second time. While the shepherd is in the church the bird
never stops singing, but as soon as he goes away, it is silent."
"Let the shepherd be brought before me at once."
"Your majesty, the shepherd seems to be a stranger; no one here knows
him. Your majesty's sons, I hear, have set guards to arrest him."
"Silence," said the emperor; "do not mention my sons; it is not seemly
for you to speak against them."
The sovereign sent some of his most trusty servants to keep watch,
seize the shepherd as soon as he entered the church and the bird began
to sing, and bring him before him. But, not content with this, he went
himself the next holiday to hear the bird's wonderful singing with his
own ears, and see the shepherd. If he had not been present, a violent
conflict would have arisen between his own people and the spies sent
by his sons, who evidently wished to lay hands on the shepherd. The
emperor ordered that he should be brought to the palace, for a strange
feeling stirred in his heart when he saw the timid youth with the
figure of a hero.
When he came out of church, the monarch went directly home to his
palace, for his heart told him that there must be something unusual
about this shepherd. On seeing him, he said:--
"Tell me, my son, from what part of the country do you come? Have you
any parents, and how did you get here?"
"My story is a long one, most noble emperor. I have parents and
brothers. I shall need more time to tell you how I came hither, but if
it is your majesty's will, I am ready. I will come to your majesty
early to-morrow morning, it is too late to-day."
"Very well, my brave fellow, I will expect you at dawn to-morrow."
Early the next morning the shepherd came to await the emperor's
commands; but as soon as the emperor heard that he had arrived, he
summoned him.
"Tell me, my son, what is the reason the magic bird sings as soon as
you enter the church, and stops when you go out."
"To understand that and other things, your majesty, let me tell you my
whole story."
"I will listen; tell me anything you please."
The shepherd then began:--
"I have a father, and brothers. I left my home to do something to
please my father, who was sad because he had a wish that could not be
fulfilled. After a journey of several days I reached a beautiful
meadow, from which branched several roads. Intending to spend the
night there, I lighted a fire, took out some of the provisions I had
brought with me, and was just sitting down to eat them, when I
suddenly saw a fox beside me. Whence it came I did not know; it seemed
as if it had sprung up out of the earth.
"'Please let me warm myself by your fire,' it said. 'See, I am so cold
that my teeth chatter. Give me a bit of bread and a glass of wine,
that I may satisfy my hunger and thirst, and tie your dog, so I can
eat in peace and rest without fear.'
"'Very well,' I replied, 'come and warm yourself. Here are my
provisions and my flask, eat and drink as much as you choose.'
"I tied my dog, and we sat down by the fire and talked together. Among
other things, I told the fox where I was going, and even asked if it
could tell me what I should do to accomplish the task I had
voluntarily undertaken.
"'Have no anxiety about that,' replied the fox. 'We'll set out
together early to-morrow morning, and if I don't help you to the goal,
never trust me again.'
"We sat by the fire, feasting like two friends, then the fox bade me
good-night, and vanished like a shadow. I wondered how it had been
possible that I did not see what direction the animal took, and while
racking my brains to find out how it had managed to go and come
unperceived, I fell asleep. When the fox came at dawn next morning, it
found me gazing in astonishment at several blocks of stone, which
resembled two men, two dogs, and two horses. As soon as I saw the
animal, we prepared to set out.
"The fox turned three somersaults and suddenly changed into a handsome
hero. On the way he told me that the place where I had spent the night
was part of his property, that he was married and had several
children, but had been condemned to wear the form of a fox until some
human being would take pity on him and receive him, let him warm
himself by the same fire, give him a bit of bread and glass of wine.
As I was this man, he was now released from the spell, and would go
with me and never leave me until I had accomplished my object. This
event pleased me, and we journeyed on and on all through the long
summer day until late at night when we reached a mountain meadow,
where we encamped. My traveling companion told me that the next day we
should be obliged to pass through the lands of several dragons, and he
thought we should there find what we sought.
"The following morning we entered the dragons' country, though
somewhat timidly, and about noon reached the dragon-palace. It is
impossible to describe the magnificent things we saw there. Gardens
with all sorts of flowers and fruits, rooms that seemed lined with
silver, so that they shone in the sun like mirrors, walls covered with
paintings and carved flowers. Every corner of the palace was gilded,
and fountains cast jets of water into the air. Luckily for us, the
dragons were not at home when we arrived. On the threshold we met a
beautiful girl, a girl who looked as sweet as if she were made of
sugar, and who advised us not to enter the court-yard in the dragons'
absence, or we should meet with some misfortune. Then she wept for joy
at seeing people from the place from whence the dragons had stolen
her. When we asked her about the wonderful bird, she said it was in
the possession of some other dragons, relatives of those on whose
lands we were.
"'Go there,' she added, 'for with God's help, I hope you will succeed,
and when you return, take me with you.'
"After she had told us how we could enter the dragons' court-yard and
what we must do, I swore by what was dearest to me in the world, my
father, that I would not leave her in the dragons' power, but take
her away. Then we continued the journey. To tell the truth, I loved
her as soon as I saw her.
"When we reached the borders of the next dragon-kingdom, we stopped to
rest, but at dawn the following day we crossed the frontier and by
noon reached their palace, which was even more beautiful than the
first one. As soon as I had dismounted from my horse, I went to the
stable, but my companion turned back, for this was what the girl had
advised. The horses were at their cribs. One turned its head and
looked at me. I patted its eyes, pulled its ears, threw a bridle over
its neck, mounted it, and in riding by, took the cage with the magic
bird that hung in the entry."
"You brought the wonderful bird?" cried the emperor. "Then you are my
son, whom all believe dead."
"Even so, father." And after kissing the emperor's hand, he begged him
to send for the poultry-keeper. When she came, the shepherd said,
"This is the girl of whom I told you."
"How is that possible!" replied the emperor. "How did she become a
poultry maid?"
"She'll tell you that herself. I don't know. So, as I was saying," he
continued, "after I had snatched the cage I fled as fast as I could on
the horse I had taken from the dragons, but the other horses began to
neigh and make such a noise that my hair fairly bristled, yet I held
firm. The dragons chased me until I reached my comrade, who was
waiting for me on the frontier. If it had not been for him, they
would have seized me, and who knows what would have become of me then.
But my companion stretched out his hand, shouting, 'Stop!' The dragons
seemed to be suddenly turned to stone; not another step forward did
they take. After embracing and kissing me he admired the bird's
beauty. The dragons did every thing in their power to get it from me,
and made all sorts of promises, but when they saw they could not
persuade me, begged me at least to give them the horse. I perceived it
would not be right to leave them in such a sad state, so I returned
the horse and went on with my companion and the bird, but the dragons
almost stared their eyes out after it.
"When we reached the other dragon palace, the girl was waiting for us
at the gate. Cracking her whip three times the whole building changed
into an apple, which she put in her pocket. I passed my arm around
her, and we set out. But oh! dear, when the dragons discovered it! How
they chased us, roaring so that our blood curdled in our veins. I
summoned all my courage, spurred my horse, and fled like the wind with
my companion. But the dragons came as fast as thought. When my comrade
saw this, and perceived that there was no possibility of escape, he
stopped, made a sign and turned them into blocks of stone. Then we
continued our journey till we reached the field from which we had
started and which was part of the fox's property. After we had rested
and I had thanked God that we had accomplished our task, I asked my
comrade what those stone pillars meant.
"He answered: 'If you know you will regret it, and if you don't know,
you will also regret it.'
"'Pray tell me.'
"'These are your brothers,' he answered. 'Instead of kindly granting
my request, as you did, they set their hounds on me, which condemned
me to wear the loathsome fox-skin still longer, so I turned them to
stone.'
"'For my sake,' I entreated, 'for the sake of our friendship, make
them men again as they were before.'
"'I prize your friendship greatly,' he replied, 'so let it be as you
wish--but you'll repent it.'
"In an instant he made a sign with his hand, the stones suddenly
shook, and my brothers remained motionless with amazement, when they
saw us before them. We took leave of my comrade and set out on our way
home. But see what a fine trick my brothers played me.
"'Brother,' they said, after we had ridden about a mile, 'we are tired
by the long distance, and it is very warm. Let us go to a pond we know
here and each drink a little to cool ourselves.' I agreed, and we went
there. The oldest drank, so did the second one, but when I was going
to drink too, lying face downward at the edge of the pond, so that I
could reach the water with my lips, as they had done, I suddenly felt
a terrible burning sensation in both feet, and when I turned to see
the cause, could not get up; my brothers had cut off both my feet, and
then hurried off, without listening to my complaints and entreaties.
"I spent three days and nights beside the pond. When my good horse saw
a dragon coming, it lifted me by my clothes with its teeth, ran as far
as it could and kicked so violently that no wild beast could approach
"At last, on the fourth day, I met a blind man groping his way along.
'Who are you?' I asked.
"'A poor, maimed fellow,' said he. Then, after he had told me that his
brothers, out of envy, had put out his eyes, I told him that my
brothers had cut off my feet.
"'I'll tell you what!' he exclaimed. 'We'll take an oath of
brotherhood. I have feet, you have eyes, so I'll carry you on my back.
I'll walk for you, and you shall see for me. A huge scorpion lives
close by, whose blood cures all kinds of diseases.'
"I accepted his offer, and we went to the scorpion's house. He was not
at home, so the blind man put me behind the door, telling me to kill
him with my sword as soon as he came in; then he hid himself behind
the stove. We did not wait long before the scorpion entered in a great
rage, for he had noticed that somebody had broken into his house. When
I saw him my heart shrunk till it was no bigger than a flea, but as he
came in I waited till he was close by me, then struck one blow that
chopped all three of his heads off at once.
"I instantly smeared myself with the hot blood and as soon as it
touched my feet they stuck as fast as if they had never been cut off.
I also smeared the blind man's eyes, and his sight returned. After
thanking God, each set out on his own way.
"I did not want to go home at once, but thought it best to hire out as
a shepherd and leave God to arrange things so that the criminals'
guilt should appear. I was not disappointed in my confidence, for you
see His power is great and His judgment just."
"Now tell me how you became a servant and poultry-maid," said the
emperor to the maiden.
"After your imperial majesty's oldest sons had cut off their youngest
brother's feet, one of them took me, the other the wonderful bird. I
thought my heart would dissolve with grief because I was obliged to
part from your majesty's youngest son, whom I loved because he was
such a noble man. They proposed that I should love one of them, and
promised that he would marry me as soon as we reached the emperor's
court. After refusing all their offers, I preferred to take service as
your majesty's poultry maid, rather than go any where else, for I knew
God would not let a man who did right perish, and now I thank Him for
having shown me that a good deed is never lost."
"Can you prove," asked the emperor, "that you are the girl and no one
"This apple will show every one that I am she," replied the girl,
drawing it from her bosom. "Your older sons knew nothing about it, or
they would have taken it from me."
With these words she went out of doors, cracked a little whip three
times over the apple and a magnificent palace, more splendid than any
in the kingdom, instantly arose.
The emperor himself was astonished. He wished to celebrate his
youngest son's return, but the latter said, "Father, before we thank
God that I have come home alive, let us three brothers submit to His
judgment."
The emperor could make no objection. The brothers were led before him
and he ordered the older ones to kneel and ask the youngest son's
forgiveness. But he replied: "If God forgives you, I will also."
As they could not avoid it, they went in front of the church, and set
out three bee-hives at equal distances apart. Each brother stood with
his feet in one, and hurled a stone into the air from a sling. The
elder brothers' stones in falling back struck them so hard on the head
that they were killed, but the youngest brother's fell in front of
Many had assembled to witness this trial. After the wedding was over
and the emperor had married his son to the poultry-maid, he came down
from the throne and gave it to the prince, who, if alive, reigns there
still.
I was present at these events, and now tell them to those who listen.
The Twins With the Golden Star.
Once upon a time something happened. If it hadn't happened, it
There was an emperor, who ruled over a whole world, and in this world
lived an old shepherd and shepherdess, who had three daughters, Anna,
Stana, and Laptitza.[1]
[Footnote 1: Little Milk-white, from "Lapte"--milk.]
Anna, the oldest sister, was so beautiful that the sheep stopped
feeding when she went among them; Stana, the second, was so lovely
that the wolves watched the herd when she was the shepherdess, but
Laptitza, the youngest, who had a skin as white as the foam of milk,
and hair as soft as the wool of the lambkins, was as beautiful as both
of her sisters put together, beautiful as only she herself could be.
One summer day, when the sunbeams were growing less scorching, the
three sisters went to the edge of the forest to pick strawberries.
While searching for them, they heard the tramp of horses' hoofs, as if
a whole troop of cavalry were dashing up. It was the emperor's son,
hunting with his friends and courtiers, all handsome, stately youths,
sitting their horses as if they were a part of their steeds, but the
handsomest and proudest of all rode the most fiery charger, and was
the emperor's son himself.
When they saw the sisters, they curbed their horses and rode more
slowly.
"Listen to me, sisters," said Anna; "if one of those youths should
choose me for his wife, I'd knead a loaf of bread which, when he had
eaten it, would make him always feel young and brave."
"And I," said Stana, "would weave my husband a shirt, in which he
could fight against dragons, go through water without being wet, or
fire without being burned."
"But I," said Laptitza, the youngest sister, "would give my husband
two beautiful sons, twin boys with golden hair, and on their foreheads
a golden star, a star as bright as Lucifer."
The youths heard these words, and turning their horses dashed toward
the maidens.
"Sacred be thy promise, thou shalt be mine, fairest empress," cried
the emperor's son, lifting Laptitza with her berries upon his horse.
"And thou shalt be mine!" "And thou shalt be mine!" said a second and
third youth; so bearing their lovely burdens on their steeds, all
dashed back to the imperial court.
The three weddings were celebrated the very next day, and for three
days and nights the festival was held throughout the empire with great
pomp and splendor. After three days and nights the news went through
the whole country that Anna had gathered grain, ground, boiled, and
kneaded it, and made a loaf of bread, as she had promised while
picking strawberries. Then, after three more days and nights, tidings
went through the land that Stana had collected flax, dried, and
hackled it, spun it into linen, wove the cloth, and made her husband a
shirt as she had promised while seeking for her strawberries. Laptitza
alone had not yet kept her word, but great things require time.
When seven weeks had passed, counting from the wedding day, the
emperor's son, now emperor, appeared before his brave companions and
the other courtiers with a very joyous face, and in a much softer
voice than ever before informed them that henceforth he should not
leave the court for a long time, his heart moved him to stay with his
wife night and day.
So the world, the country, and the whole empire rejoiced in the
expectation of seeing something never beheld before.
But many things happen in this world, among them much that is good and
much that is evil.
The emperor had a step-mother, who had brought with her to the palace
a daughter of her first husband, a girl with beautiful hair. But woe
betide those who have such relationships.
The step-mother had intended that her daughter should become the
emperor's wife and empress of the whole country, instead of little
Milk-white, the shepherd's daughter. Therefore she determined that if
things fell out as Laptitza had promised, the emperor and the world
should believe they did not happen according to the prediction.
But the step-mother could not carry out her plan, because the emperor
remained with his wife day and night. Yet she thought that gradually,
by coaxing and cunning, she might get rid of him, and then Laptitza
would be left in her care and she would provide for every thing.
But she could not get rid of the emperor by means of a few coaxing
words. The wind blew them away, and all her craft was useless. Time
passed, the day for the fulfillment of Laptitza's promise was drawing
near, and still the emperor never left his wife.
When the step-mother saw that no plot succeeded, she felt as if a
stone were lying heavy on her heart, and sent a message to her
brother, whose kingdom was very near, to ask him to come with his
soldiers and summon the emperor to a war.
This was a clever plan and, as will be seen, not an unsuccessful one.
The emperor fairly leaped into the air in his rage, when he heard that
hostile soldiers were on the march to attack his country, and that
something would occur which had not happened for a long time--a
battle, a terrible battle, a battle between two emperors. The young
husband saw that there was no help for it, he must do what needed to
be done.
That is the way with emperors. No matter how much they wish to guard
their wives--if they hear of war, their hearts fairly leap in their
bodies, their brains swell almost to bursting, their eyes grow dim,
and leaving wife and children in God's care, they dash like the wind
to battle.
The emperor departed at the first sign of peril, moved as swiftly as
one of God's judgments, fought as only he could fight, and at dawn on
the morning of the third day was back again at the imperial court, his
heart soothed by the battle, but full of unsatisfied longing to know
what had happened during his absence.
And--this had happened. Just at dawn on the morning of the third day,
when the stars were paling in the sky, and the emperor was only three
steps from the palace-gate, the Lord's gift came down to the earth,
and Laptitza's promise was fulfilled--two beautiful twin princes,
exactly alike, each with golden hair and a golden star on his
forehead.
But the world was not to see them!
The step-mother, as wicked as her thoughts, hastily put two puppies in
the place of the beautiful twins, and buried the golden-haired
children at the corner of the palace, just under the emperor's
windows.
When the monarch entered the palace he saw and heard nothing except
the two puppies the step-mother had put in the twins' place. No words
were wasted. The emperor saw with his own eyes, and that was enough.
Laptitza had not kept her promise, and there was nothing to be done
except mete out her punishment.
He could not help it, and though his own heart was torn, commanded
that the empress should be buried to her breast in the earth and so
remain before the eyes of the world, in token of what befell those
who tried to deceive an emperor.
The next day the step-mother's wish was fulfilled. The emperor married
a second time, and again the wedding festivities lasted three days and
three nights.
But God's blessing does not rest upon unjust deeds.
The two princes found no rest in the earth. Two beautiful aspens
sprang up where they were buried, but when the step-mother saw them
she ordered them to be pulled up by the roots. The emperor, however,
said: "Let them grow, I like to see them before the window. I never
beheld such aspens before."
So the trees grew, grew as no other aspens ever had grown, every day a
year's growth, every night another year's growth, but in the dawn of
morning, when the stars were paling in the sky, three years' growth in
a single moment. When three days and three nights had passed, the two
aspens were lofty trees, lifting their boughs to the emperor's window,
and when the wind stirred the branches, he listened to their rustling
all day long.
The step-mother suspected what they were, and pondered all day trying
to find some way to get rid of the trees at any cost. It was a
difficult task, but a woman's will can squeeze milk from a stone, a
woman's cunning conquers heroes--what force can not accomplish, fair
words win, and when these fail, hypocritical tears succeed.
One morning the empress sat down on the side of her husband's bed and
began to overwhelm him with loving words and tender caresses. It was
a long time before the thread broke, but at last--even emperors are
mortal!
"Very well," he said, reluctantly, "have your own way; order the
aspens to be cut down, but one must be made into a bedstead for me,
the other for you."
This satisfied the empress. The aspens were cut down, and before night
the beds were standing in the emperor's room.
When he lay down, he felt as if he had become a hundred times heavier,
yet he had never rested so well; but it seemed to the empress as if
she were lying on thorns and nettles, so that she could not sleep all
night long.
When the emperor had fallen asleep, the beds began to creak, and amid
this creaking the empress fancied she heard words that no one else
understood.
"Is it hard for you, brother?" asked one of the beds.
"No, it isn't hard for me," replied the bed in which the emperor was
sleeping, "I am happy, for my beloved father rests upon me."
"It's hard for me," replied the other, "for on me lies a wicked soul."
So the beds talked on in the empress's ears until the dawn of morning.
When daylight came, the empress planned how she could destroy the
beds. At last she ordered two bedsteads exactly like them, and when
the emperor went hunting, placed them in his room without his
knowledge; but the aspen beds, down to the very smallest splinter, she
threw into the fire.
When they were burned so entirely that not even a bit of charcoal
remained, the empress collected the ashes and scattered them to the
winds, that they might be strewn over nine countries and seas, and not
an atom find another atom through all eternity.
But she had not noticed that just when the fire was burning brightest
two sparks rose, and soaring upward, fell again into the midst of the
deep river that flowed through the empire, where they were changed
into two little fishes with golden scales, so exactly alike that
nobody could help knowing they were twin brothers.
One day the imperial fishermen went out early in the morning, and
threw their nets into the water. Just at the moment the last stars
were fading, one of the men drew up his net and beheld what he had
never seen before: two tiny fishes with golden scales.
The other fishermen assembled to see the miracle, but when they had
beheld and admired it, determined to carry the fish alive to the
emperor for a gift.
"Don't take us there, we've just come from there, and it will be our
destruction," said one of the fishes.
"But what shall I do with you?" asked the fisherman.
"Go and gather the dew from the leaves, let us swim in it, put us in
the sun, and don't come back again till the sunbeams have dried the
dew," said the second little fish.
The fisherman did as he was told, gathered the dew from the leaves,
put the little fish into it, placed them in the sun, and did not come
back till the dew was all dried up.
But what had happened! What did he see?
Two boys, handsome princes with golden hair and a golden star on their
foreheads, so exactly alike that no one who saw them could help
knowing that they were twin brothers.
The children grew very rapidly. Every day enough for a year, and every
night enough for another year, but in the dawn of morning when the
stars paled in the sky, enough for three years in a single moment.
Besides, they grew as no other children ever had grown, three times as
fast in age, strength, and wisdom. When three days and nights had
passed, they were twelve years in age, twenty-four in strength, and
thirty-six in wisdom.
"Now let us go to our father," said one of the princes to the
fisherman.
The fisherman dressed the lads in beautiful clothing, and made each a
lambskin cap, which the boys drew low over their faces, that no one
might see their golden hair and the golden star on their foreheads,
and then took the princes to the imperial palace.
It was broad daylight when they arrived.
"We want to speak to the emperor," said one of the princes to the
guard, who stood armed at the door of the palace.
"That can't be done, he's at table," replied the soldier.
"Just because he is at table," said the second prince, passing
through the door.
The guards ran up and tried to drive the boys out of the court-yard,
but the boys slipped through their fingers like quicksilver. Three
paces forward, three up, and they were standing before the great hall,
where the emperor was dining with all his court.
"We want to come in," said one of the princes sharply, to the servants
who stood at the door.
"That can't be done," one of the lackeys answered.
"Indeed! We'll see whether it can be done or not," cried the other
prince, pushing the men aside right and left.
But there were a great many lackeys, and only two princes. A tumult
and uproar arose outside, that resounded through the palace.
"What is going on out there?" asked the emperor angrily.
The princes stopped when they heard their father's voice.
"Two boys are trying to enter by force," said an attendant,
approaching the emperor.
"By force? Who seeks to enter my palace by force? Who are these boys?"
cried the emperor in the same breath.
"We know not, your majesty," replied the lackey, "but there must be
something uncommon about them, for the lads are as strong as young
lions, they overpowered the guard at the gate, and have given us
plenty to do. Besides, they are proud, they don't lift their caps from
their heads."
The emperor flushed scarlet with rage.
"Throw them out!" he cried. "Set the dogs on them."
"Never mind, we will go," said the princes, weeping at the harsh
words, as they went down the steps again.
As they reached the gate, they were stopped by a servant, who was out
of breath from running to overtake them.
"The emperor has commanded you to come back, the empress wants to see
The princes hesitated, then turned, climbed the stairs, and still with
their caps on their heads appeared before the emperor.
There stood a long, wide table, at which sat all the imperial guests;
at the head was the emperor, and beside him the empress, reclining on
twelve silk cushions.
As the princes entered, one of these twelve cushions fell to the
floor, only eleven remaining under the royal lady.
"Take off your caps!" cried a courtier.
"To wear the head covered is a token of rank among men. We wish to be
what we are."
"Why, yes!" exclaimed the emperor, softened by the musical words that
fell from the boys' lips. "Remain what you are, but who are you?
Whence do you come, and what do you want?"
"We are twin brothers, members of a family that is broken in twain,
half in the earth, half at the head of the table; we come from whence
we went, and have reached the place whence we came; we have had a
long journey, have spoken in the sighing of the wind, given a voice to
wood, sang in the ripples of the water, but now we wish to chant in
human language a song you know without knowing it."
A second cushion fell from under the empress.
"Let them go home with their nonsense!" she said to her husband.
"Oh! no, let them sing," replied the emperor. "You only wanted to see
them, but I wish to hear them. Sing, boys!"
The empress was silent, and the princes began to sing the story of
their lives.
"There was once an emperor," they began, and a third cushion fell from
under the empress.
When they described the emperor's departure to the war, three cushions
fell at once, and when the princes had finished their song not a
single one remained. But when they took off their caps and showed
their golden hair and the golden star on their foreheads, guests,
courtiers and emperor closed their eyes, that they might not be
dazzled by so much radiance.
Afterward, what ought to have been from the beginning, happened.
Laptitza sat at the head of the table beside her husband, but the
step-mother's daughter served as the humblest maid in the palace, and
the wicked step-mother was fastened to the tail of a wild mare and
dragged around the earth seven times, that the whole world might know
and never forget, that whoever plans evil comes to a bad end.
Youth Without Age and Life Without Death.
Once upon a time something happened whose like never occurred
before--if it had not happened it would not be told--since the flea
had one foot shod with ninety-nine pounds of iron and jumped into the
skies to get us fairy tales.
There was once a mighty emperor and empress. Both were young and
handsome, and as they desired the blessing of children they did every
thing that was necessary to secure it, that is they went to the
witches and philosophers and asked them to read the stars to find out
whether they would have children or not. But it was all in vain.
Finally the emperor heard that a very wise old man lived in a
neighboring village, and sent for him. The messengers returned with
the answer: "Let him who needs me come to me." So the emperor and
empress set out for the wise man's house, taking with them several of
their courtiers, attendants, and soldiers. When the old man saw them
in the distance, he rose, went to meet them, and said at once:
"Welcome! But what do you want to know, oh, emperor! your wish will
bring you sorrow."
"I am not here to question you about that," replied the emperor, "but
to learn whether you have any plants you can give us that will bestow
the blessing of children."
"I have," the old man answered, "but you will possess only one
child. He will be a handsome, lovable boy, yet you will not be able to
keep him long."
After the emperor and empress had obtained the herbs they joyfully
returned to the palace. The whole empire, the courtiers, and all the
attendants rejoiced too. But when the hour of its birth came, the
child began to scream in a way no magic arts could silence. The
emperor commenced to promise it all the good things the world
contained, but it was impossible to quiet it.
"Hush, father's pet," said the emperor, "I will give you this or that
kingdom; hush, my son, I will give you this or that princess for your
wife." At last, when he saw the child would not stop, he added: "Hush,
my boy, I will give you youth without age and life without death."
Then the prince stopped crying; the courtiers beat drums and blew
trumpets, and there were great rejoicings throughout the empire for a
whole week.
The older the boy grew, the more thoughtful and reflective he became.
He went to the schools and the philosophers and gained every kind of
learning, so that the emperor died of joy and came to life again. The
whole realm was proud of having a prince so wise and learned, a
second King Solomon. But one day, when the lad had just reached his
fifteenth year and the emperor sat at a banquet with the nobles and
grandees of the country, the handsome prince rose, saying: "Father,
the time has come, you must now give me what you promised at my
birth!"
When the emperor heard this he grew very sorrowful and answered: "Why,
my son, how can I give you an impossible thing? If I promised it to
you then, it was only to hush you."
"If you can't give it to me, father, I shall be obliged to wander
through the whole world till I find what was promised to me, and for
which I was born."
Then all the nobles and the emperor fell at his feet and besought him
not to quit the country, because, as the courtiers said, his father
was growing old, and they would place him on the throne and give him
the most beautiful princess under the sun for his wife. But it was
impossible to shake his resolution, he remained as firm as a rock.
After his father had seen and duly considered all these things, he
gave his consent and prepared to supply the prince with provisions and
whatever else he might need for his journey.
The young hero went to the imperial stables, where the finest steeds
in the whole realm were standing, to choose one of them; but when he
laid his hand on the horse's tail he knocked it down, and so they all
fell, one after another. At last, just as he was going out, he let his
eyes wander around the building once more and saw in one corner a
sick, weak horse, covered with sores. He went up to it, and when he
grasped it by the tail, the animal turned its head, saying:
"What do you command, my master? I thank God that He has permitted a
hero's hand to touch me once more."
And, planting its feet firmly, it remained standing. The young prince
told it what he intended to do, and the horse replied:
"To obtain your wish, you must ask your father for the sword, lance,
bow, quiver of arrows, and garments he wore when a youth; but you must
take care of me with your own hands for six weeks and give me oats
boiled in milk."
When the prince begged the emperor for the articles the horse had
advised, the monarch called the major-domo of the palace and ordered
him to open all the chests of clothing, that his son might choose what
he pleased. The young hero, after rummaging them three whole days, at
last found in the very bottom of an old trunk the weapons and garments
his father had worn in his youth, but the arms were covered with rust.
He set to work to clean them with his own hands and in six weeks,
during the time he was taking care of the horse, he succeeded in
making the weapons as bright and shining as a mirror. When the horse
heard from the handsome prince that the clothes and arms were cleaned
and ready, it shook itself once. All the sores instantly fell off and
there it stood, a strong, well-formed animal, with four wings. When
the hero saw this, he said:
"We'll go in three days!"
"May you have a long life, master. From to-day I shall be at your
service," the horse answered.
On the morning of the third day there was great mourning throughout
the whole court and empire. The handsome prince, clad like a hero,
holding his sword in his hand and riding the horse he had chosen, took
leave of the emperor, the empress, the great nobles and lesser
grandees, the army, and all the attendants, who, with tears in their
eyes, implored him to give up the journey and not risk his life; but
setting spurs to his steed, he dashed through the gate like the wind,
followed by the carts loaded with provisions and money, and the two
hundred horsemen the emperor had commanded to accompany him.
After reaching the boundaries of his father's country and arriving at
the wilderness, the prince distributed all his property among the
escort, bade them farewell, and sent them back, keeping for himself
only as much food as the horse could carry. Then he turned toward the
east and rode for three days and three nights, till he came to a wide
plain where lay a great many human bones.
When he stopped here to rest, the horse said: "You must know, master,
that we are on the land of a Woodpecker Fairy who is so wicked that
nobody can enter her domain without being murdered. She was once a
woman, but the curse of her parents, whom she angered by her
disobedience, turned her into a woodpecker. She is with her children
now, but you will meet her to-morrow in yonder forest; she will come
to kill you. She is terribly big, but don't be frightened; hold the
bow ready to pierce her with an arrow, and keep your sword and lance
in hand, so that you can use them in case of need."
Then they went to rest, taking turns in watching.
At dawn the next morning they prepared to pass through the forest; the
prince saddled and bridled the horse, drew the girths tighter than
usual, and mounted. Suddenly he heard a tremendous crashing. "Make
ready, master," said the horse, "the Woodpecker Fairy is coming." As
she approached, she moved so fast that she tore the trees down; but
the horse leaped upward like the wind, so that it was almost over her,
and the prince shot off one of her feet with an arrow. Just as he was
about to discharge the second arrow, she cried:
"Stop, my young hero, I'll do you no harm." And seeing that he did not
believe her, she gave him the promise written with her own blood.
"Your horse can not be killed, my young hero," she added, "it is
enchanted; if it hadn't been for that, I would have roasted and eaten
you. Know that until to-day no mortal man has ventured to cross my
boundaries as far as this; a few bold wights who dared to make the
trial, reached the plain where you saw so many bones."
They now went to the fairy's house, where she entertained them as
guests. But while sitting at the table enjoying the banquet, the
Woodpecker Fairy moaned with pain, so the prince pulled the foot he
had shot off out of the traveling bag where he had put it, fastened it
on, and it instantly healed. The hostess, in her joy, kept open house
for three days, and begged the emperor's son to choose one of her
daughters, all three of whom were beautiful as fairies, for his wife.
He would not do that, but told her what he was seeking, and she
replied:
"With your horse and your heroic courage, I believe you will succeed."
After three days had passed, the prince prepared to continue his
journey and departed. He rode on, and on, and on; the road seemed to
grow longer and longer, but when he had finally crossed the frontiers
of the Woodpecker Fairy's kingdom, he entered a beautiful meadow, one
side of which was covered with blooming plants, but the other was
scorched.
The prince asked why the grass was singed, and the horse answered:
"We are now in the domain of the Scorpion Witch; she is the Woodpecker
Fairy's sister, but they are both so wicked that they can't live
together. Their parents' curse has fallen upon them, and so, as you
see, they have become monsters; their enmity goes beyond all bounds;
they are always trying to get possession of each other's lands. When
this one is very angry she spits fire and pitch; she must have had
some quarrel with her sister, and, to drive her out of her kingdom,
has burned the grass on which she was standing. She is even worse than
her sister, and has three heads. We will rest awhile now, and be ready
at the first peep of dawn to-morrow."
The next day they prepared themselves just as they did when they
expected to meet the Woodpecker fairy, and set out. Soon they heard a
howling and rustling unlike any thing ever known before.
"Make ready, master, the Scorpion Witch is coming."
The Scorpion Witch, with one jaw in the sky and the other on the
earth, approached like the wind, spitting fire as she came, but the
horse darted upward as swiftly as an arrow, and then rushed over her a
little on one side. The hero shot an arrow and one of her heads fell,
but when he was going to strike off another, the Scorpion Witch
entreated him to forgive her, she would do him no harm, and to
convince him of this she gave him her promise, written in her own
Like the Woodpecker Fairy, she entertained the prince, who returned
her head, which grew on again, and at the end of three days he resumed
his travels.
When the hero and his horse had reached the boundaries of the Scorpion
Witch's kingdom they hurried on without resting till they came to a
field covered with flowers, where reigned perpetual spring. Every
blossom was remarkably beautiful and filled with a sweet, intoxicating
fragrance; a gentle breeze fanned them all. They remained here to
